---
title: "Towards an Active Inference Personality Framework: The Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model"
shorttitle: "Deep-Self Model of Personality"
author:
  - name: Dominique Makowski
    orcid: 0000-0001-5375-9967
    email: D.Makowski@sussex.ac.uk
    url: https://realitybendinglab.com/
    corresponding: true
    # roles:
    #   - Project administration
    #   - Data curation
    #   - Formal Analysis
    #   - Investigation
    #   - Visualization
    #   - Writing – original draft
    #   - Writing – review & editing
    affiliations:
      - id: "id1"
        name: "University of Sussex"
        department: "School of Psychology"
        city: "Brighton"
        country: "UK"
        postal-code: "BN1 9RH"
      - ref: "id2"
        name: "University of Sussex"
        department:  "Sussex Centre for Consciousness Science"
blank-lines-above-author-note: 2
author-note:
  status-changes:
    affiliation-change: null
    deceased: null
  disclosures:
    study-registration: null
    data-sharing: null
    related-report: null
    conflict-of-interest: The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
    financial-support: null
    gratitude: null
    authorship-agreements: null
abstract: "Contemporary psychological science heavily relies on empirical taxonomies, such as the Five-Factor Model, to categorize individual differences. Yet these descriptive structures remain largely silent on the generative mechanisms underlying human personality. To bridge established trait psychology with active inference, we introduce the Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model as a conceptual-level framework. We argue that personality is usefully understood not as a static inventory of traits an individual possesses, but as a topography of expected free energy: a landscape of attractor basins whose depth and location are jointly shaped by an agent's deep priors and precision allocation strategies. This hierarchical architecture cascades from foundational Ultra-Priors governing Epistemic, Allostatic, and Teleological imperatives (encoding an agent's baseline assumptions about world-opacity, metabolic efficacy, and goal-directed value) through Core Affective States (Epistemic Arousal, Vitality, Valence), into Precision Biases that shape resource allocation across the minimal, agentic, and narrative self-models. We propose that this parameter space provides a common vocabulary onto which the constructs of major cybernetic, affective, and clinical taxonomies (e.g., CB5T, BIS/BAS, and HiTOP) can be mapped. A proof-of-concept simulation illustrates that the cascade's directional topology is capable of reproducing the empirical covariance structure of the Big-5 factors, though it does not by itself establish that the proposed topology is uniquely required. The framework's central value lies less in taxonomic integration than in a set of falsifiable, interaction-based predictions for cognitive neuroscience and computational psychiatry."
keywords:
  - active inference
  - free energy principle
  - personality
  - individual differences
  - predictive processing
  - cybernetics
  - computational psychiatry
impact-statement: "Dominant personality models describe how people differ but not why those differences arise. The Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model addresses this gap by relating the major dimensions of personality to a small set of hierarchical expectations and precision-allocation strategies framed in the language of active inference. In doing so it recasts traits as the surface expression of an agent's deep priors, offering a common vocabulary in which otherwise disparate taxonomies can be compared and yielding testable, mechanistic predictions for cognitive neuroscience and computational psychiatry."
word-count: false
floatsintext: true
numbered-lines: false
bibliography: bibliography.bib
suppress-title-page: false
link-citations: true
mask: false
lang: en
language:
  citation-last-author-separator: "and"
  citation-masked-author: "Masked Citation"
  citation-masked-date: "n.d."
  citation-masked-title: "Masked Title"
  email: "Email"
  title-block-author-note: "Author Note"
  title-block-correspondence-note: "Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to"
  title-block-role-introduction: "Author roles were classified using the Contributor Role Taxonomy (CRediT; [credit.niso.org](https://credit.niso.org)) as follows:"
  title-impact-statement: "Impact Statement"
fontsize: 12pt
execute:
  cache: true
format:
  apaquarto-html:
    toc: true
  apaquarto-docx:
    toc: false
  apaquarto-typst:
    keep-typ: true
    list-of-figures: false
    list-of-tables: false
    toc: true
    papersize: "us-letter"
    numbersections: true
  apaquarto-pdf:
    documentmode: jou
    keep-tex: true
    pdf-standard: ua-2
editor_options:
  chunk_output_type: console
---

<!-- Target journals:
- Nature Human Behaviour
- Behavioral and Brain Sciences
- Psychological Review
- Trends in Cognitive Sciences
- Perspectives on Psych Science
- Personality & Social Psych Review
- Psychological Bulletin
- Physics of Life Reviews
- Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews
- Neuroscience of Consciousness
- Computational Psychiatry -->


# Introduction
 
Over the years, personality psychology has achieved the development of robust and consensual descriptive taxonomies of human individual differences. The Big-5 Model [@costa1992neo; @goldberg1990alternative] has proven replicable across cultures, methods, and informants, accounting for a substantial proportion of variance in behaviour, health, and life outcomes [@roberts2007power; @soto2017next]. Its hierarchical extension into the meta-traits of Plasticity and Stability [@deyoung2006higher] reveals that this variance is not merely structured, but organized in a way that hints at an underlying generative structure. At the level of psychopathology, the Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology [HiTOP; @kotov2017hitop] has extended this approach into clinical science, demonstrating that many maladaptive traits and psychopathological symptoms can be grouped into the internalizing, externalizing, and thought disorder spectra, which form a coherent dimensional continuum with normal-range personality. Together, these frameworks represent the cumulative empirical achievement of trait science: they describe what personality looks like, with extraordinary reliability, across the full range of human behavioral variation. What they do not do, by design, is explain *why* personality coalesces that way.
 
The Big Five and HiTOP remain, by design, largely agnostic about the generative processes that produce stable dispositions: why particular traits co-occur as they do, why the same individual differences express themselves across clinical and non-clinical phenotypes, and why personality is so robustly heritable yet meaningfully shaped by experience. This mechanistic silence is the central theoretical gap that the present framework addresses.
 
## The Limits of Existing Mechanistic Accounts
 
This gap has not gone unnoticed. Three broad traditions have attempted to ground personality in underlying mechanisms. The first is neurobiological: @eysenck1967biological anchored Extraversion and Neuroticism in cortical arousal and limbic reactivity; @gray1981critique reconceived these dimensions in terms of opponent motivational systems: the Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS), sensitive to punishment and uncertainty, and the Behavioral Approach System (BAS), sensitive to reward, with substantial neuroanatomical and pharmacological support; and @cloninger1987systematic extended this into a biopsychosocial model distinguishing temperament (biologically grounded, early-emerging) from character (higher-order, self-reflective). These contributions were foundational: they shifted personality science from pure description toward biological instantiation and opened the door to testable predictions about pharmacological manipulation and neural correlates. Yet each framework remained relatively domain-local, anchored in a specific neural system (arousal, reinforcement, dopamine) without a unifying computational principle that scales across all levels of psychological organization.
 
The second tradition is cybernetic. DeYoung's Cybernetic Big Five Theory [CB5T; -@deyoung2015cybernetic], building on Powers' [-@powers1973behavior] perceptual control theory, reconceptualizes personality as the characteristic parameters of a goal-directed, self-regulating system navigating uncertainty and reward. CB5T offers genuine mechanistic traction: Extraversion is reframed as reward-driven approach, Neuroticism as the chronic misalignment between expected and encountered outcomes, and the Plasticity/Stability meta-trait structure as reflecting the fundamental cybernetic tradeoff between exploration and regulation. This is conceptually the closest precursor to the present framework, and the present model is best understood as an attempt to formalize and deepen the CB5T intuition within a more principled computational architecture. However, CB5T remains primarily verbal: it does not specify the mathematical form of the control-system computations, the algorithmic structure of the hierarchy, or the mechanism by which regulatory failures cascade into psychopathology.
 
The third tradition is computational, and it is the most recent. Active inference models [@friston2017activeprocess; @pezzulo2024] and hierarchical Bayesian accounts of perception and action [@clark2016surfing; @hohwy2013predictive] have begun to be applied to individual differences in cognition, emotion, and psychopathology [@badcock2017depression; @huys2016computational; @smith2021recent]. Yet a systematic application of these formalisms to the full landscape of personality to cover not only cognitive style but affective temperament, motivational structure, self-model architecture, and their continuity with clinical psychopathology has not been attempted. These computational accounts have largely been developed independently of the taxonomic personality literature, leaving the rich empirical structure of the Big-5 and HiTOP unexplained rather than subsumed. Compounding this fragmentation, the proliferation of partially overlapping constructs across frameworks has produced what @kelley1927interpretation termed the jingle-jangle fallacy: distinct labels applied to identical processes, and identical labels redefined across frameworks [@bainbridge2022evaluating]. A mechanistic account operating at the level of latent computational processes rather than surface-level trait labels offers a principled basis for resolving these ambiguities.
 
## The Free Energy Principle as a Unifying Framework
 
The framework we propose draws its computational foundation from the Free Energy Principle [FEP; @friston2010free] and its action-oriented extension, active inference [@friston2017activeprocess]. The FEP holds that any self-organizing biological system (*i.e.,* any system that maintains its structural integrity against the entropic tendency toward disorder) must, implicitly or explicitly, act to minimize the divergence between its internal model of the world and the sensory observations it receives. This quantity, formalized as "variational free energy", serves as a tractable upper bound on surprise: a measure of how poorly a system's generative model accounts for its current sensory states. Minimizing free energy is equivalent to maintaining an accurate internal model of the world and, by extension, maintaining the organism's own organized existence.
 
In the active inference formulation, agents minimize free energy through two complementary strategies. *Perceptual inference* updates internal beliefs to better fit incoming sensory data, changing its model to fit the world. *Active inference* changes the world to fit the model: it generates actions that bring sensory states into correspondence with the predictions of the internal generative model. These two strategies are not alternatives but partners in a continuous cycle of self-organization. Their relative balance, determined by the *precision* (inverse variance) assigned to prior beliefs versus incoming prediction errors, is what determines whether an agent primarily accommodates to the world or asserts upon it.
 
This architecture is hierarchical. Biological brains implement generative models as deep hierarchies of predictive representations, where higher levels generate top-down predictions about lower-level activity, and lower levels propagate bottom-up prediction errors whenever observations deviate from these predictions [@friston2008hierarchical; @rao1999predictive]. Precision weighting (the selective amplification or attenuation of prediction errors at each level) is the unified mechanistic substrate of attention, confidence, and affective valuation. The FEP is therefore not merely a theory of perception or action, but a theory of the entire self-organizing agent: from the interoceptive signals that anchor bodily selfhood to the long-range policies that constitute deliberate goal pursuit.
 
What makes the FEP particularly compelling as a foundation for a personality theory is that it operates across multiple timescales simultaneously. Fast timescale dynamics (moment-to-moment perceptual inference) are nested within slower dynamics (learning about environmental statistics), which are nested within slower dynamics still (updating the deep prior beliefs that constitute the enduring self). This nested temporal architecture maps naturally onto the structure of personality itself. After all, traits are defined precisely by their stability. They persist across contexts not as fixed biological endowments, but because they are implemented as deep, slowly updating prior beliefs. On the FEP account, a trait is not a cause of behaviour; it is the computational signature of a stable configuration of prior expectations and precision weightings, whose downstream consequences we observe as consistent patterns of affect, cognition, and action. This insight, that personality is best understood as *prior architecture* rather than as a set of fixed endowments, is the conceptual pivot of the present framework.
 
## Personality as a Free Energy Landscape
 
Under the FEP, an agent's generative model defines an implicit probability distribution over possible states of the world. This distribution has a geometry: some configurations of belief and policy correspond to regions of low expected free energy, *i.e.,* states the agent's model treats as coherent, predictable, and aligned with its own preferred outcomes, while others correspond to regions of high expected free energy, treated as uncertain, costly, or threatening. The agent's behaviour is not random within this geometry; it gravitates toward the low-free-energy configurations. In this sense, the trajectory of behaviour through state-space is analogous to the movement of celestial bodies under general relativity: just as gravity warps spacetime to dictate orbital geodesics, an agent's deep priors warp the free energy manifold, creating the path of least resistance that the system inevitably follows.

These low-free-energy configurations are the model's *attractor basins*. The depth of a basin (which also corresponds to the amount of perturbation the system can absorb before being dislodged from its habitual configuration) is determined by the precision assigned to the governing priors: high-precision priors create deep, rigid attractors that resist revision; low-precision priors create shallow, fluid ones that update readily under evidence. An agent's characteristic behavioural profile, its persistent ways of perceiving, feeling, and acting, corresponds not to some quantity the agent possesses but to the geometry of its free energy landscape: the location, depth, and connectivity of its attractor basins. A trait, in this dynamical account, is not something one *has*, it is a basin one falls into. By extension, personality profiles are the macro-level landscape topographies of those basins: a complex, idiosyncratic manifold of nested attractors governing the agent's trajectory.

 
This reformulation resolves several puzzles that the purely descriptive tradition leaves untouched. Trait co-occurrence becomes the downstream signature of shared priors: Neuroticism correlates reliably with emotional reactivity, rumination, and somatic vigilance because all three express one generative model that expects the world to be volatile, the body to be under threat, and information to be unreliable. The Plasticity and Stability meta-traits partition the phenotypic space as they do because they track the fundamental tradeoff between exploration (seeking information to update the model) and regulation (maintaining its stability against perturbation), the same tradeoff that structures the FEP's treatment of expected information gain versus free energy reduction. And personality dimensions and psychopathological spectra share genetic and structural variance because both are attractors in the same landscape: psychopathology is not categorically distinct from personality but comprises configurations that are especially costly, rigid, or maladaptive under typical environmental conditions.
 
# The Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model
 
The present paper introduces the Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model as a structured realization of these principles. The model proposes that the free energy landscape of personality is generated by a hierarchy in which parameter configurations at each level constrain and shape the states at the next. We are explicit about the model's formal status from the outset. At Marr's [-@marr1982vision] computational level, the framework is an active-inference account: it asserts that personality variation reflects individual differences in deep prior beliefs and precision allocation within a free-energy-minimizing agent. At the algorithmic level, however, what we specify and implement is not a full active-inference scheme. We do not specify a joint distribution over observations and hidden states, perform variational free-energy minimization, or select policies through expected free energy. Instead, each downstream node is computed as a precision-weighted linear combination of its upstream inputs, with selected multiplicative interaction terms. This is, formally, a fixed-weight directed path model (structurally a recursive structural-equation model with a theoretically rather than empirically specified topology), and the precision-weighting terminology should be read as a motivated interpretation of its coefficients rather than as a claim that variational message passing has been implemented [@friston2008hierarchical]. The framework's distinctive contribution lies not in novel computational machinery but in the theoretical motivation of a specific path structure: the claim that this particular topology, grounded in active-inference reasoning, is the one that generates the observed personality covariance structure.
 
The hierarchy cascades from foundational *Ultra-Priors* at the apex (deep prior expectations governing the agent's epistemic, allostatic, and teleological constitution) through emergent *Core Affective States* (Epistemic Arousal, Vitality, and Valence) that serve as precision-weighted summaries of upstream signals, into *Precision Biases* that govern attentional and volitional resource allocation across the Minimal, Agentic, and Narrative registers of self-organization, and finally into the observable *phenotypic profiles* that empirical taxonomy has catalogued as traits, spectra, and emotional types.

The core functional relationship can be stated compactly. The value $x_j$ of a downstream node is the precision-weighted combination of its upstream inputs $\{x_i\}$, where precision $\pi_{ij}$ is the inverse of the variance propagated along each projection:

$$
x_j = \frac{\sum_i \pi_{ij}\, w_{ij}\, x_i}{\sum_i \pi_{ij}}, \qquad \pi_{ij} = \frac{1}{\sigma_{ij}^{2}},
$$

with $w_{ij}\in[-1,1]$ the signed connection strength (positive for activating, negative for inhibiting projections). This precision-normalised weighted sum is the operation implemented at every level of the companion application and constitutes the linear, additive backbone of the cascade. The most consequential personality configurations, however, arise where two upstream parameters act conjunctively rather than additively; these are captured by multiplicative interaction terms and are the locus of the model's distinctive, non-additive predictions (developed below).

Because the topology is fixed and the weights are not estimated from the phenotypic data, the cascade's covariance structure is determined by its path coefficients in exactly the way a structural-equation model's is. The framework therefore does not claim a different *mathematical* mechanism for covariance than factor-analytic or path-analytic models; what it claims is a different *source* for the path structure. Where factor analysis identifies covariance empirically and leaves its origin open, and neurobiological models attribute covariance to shared substrate without specifying the linking computation, the cascade proposes that the same upstream configuration projects onto multiple downstream phenotypes, so that their covariance is a consequence of a theoretically motivated generative topology. This is a substantive and falsifiable claim about *which* topology is correct, but it is a claim about structure, not a demonstration that the structure follows from active-inference first principles.
 
Several further commitments warrant explicit statement. First, the model remains largely agnostic about specific neural implementations, except where strong independent evidence supports a claim. Second, the model does not compete with the Big-5 or HiTOP as descriptive systems; it offers a candidate mechanistic interpretation of the patterns those systems describe. It is important to be clear about the limits of this interpretation. The cascade does not derive the number five, nor does it predict from first principles that personality variance must partition into a specific number of orthogonal dimensions; we return to this point below. What it offers is a hypothesized mapping in which the broad factors correspond to stable attractor configurations of the cascade, and in which their higher-order meta-trait structure (Plasticity and Stability) is interpreted as reflecting the exploration-versus-regulation architecture of the hierarchy rather than being an unexplained empirical regularity. Throughout, where we write that a phenotype "corresponds to" or "maps onto" a cascade configuration, we intend a theoretically motivated correspondence and an associated causal hypothesis, not a formal derivation from axioms. Third, the hierarchy is not strictly unidirectional. Ultra-Priors are the slowest-updating level, constituted largely by genetic, developmental, and early experiential factors, but they are not immutable: sustained therapeutic, pharmacological, or transformative experiential interventions and catastrophic life events that generate sufficient precision-weighted prediction error at the highest levels of the hierarchy can revise them. The unidirectionality of the cascade is a description of moment-to-moment information flow, not a claim about the impossibility of deep change.


Finally, the structure described below should not be taken as a biologically literal claim, nor as an assertion that the number six is uniquely correct. Our proposal is more modest and more falsifiable: we put forward six candidate latent dimensions that appear *sufficient* to explain a large fraction of personality variation under an active-inference framework. We do not propose that exactly six Ultra-Priors exist as discrete neuronal populations, nor that their influence propagates through the cascade via identifiable point-to-point projections. Predictive coding architectures in biological brains are densely recurrent, with complex paths of mutual influence between any two nodes in the hierarchy; each parameter we describe almost certainly corresponds to a distributed population-level computation rather than a single identifiable substrate. Each "Ultra-Prior" is better understood as a functional attractor in a much larger underlying system of nested priors, and the three-level structure of the cascade is a minimum viable ontology: the smallest set of functional distinctions that, in combination, generates the observed covariance structure of personality with sufficient granularity to yield testable predictions. The number six reflects the orthogonal dimensions we judge sufficient to span the phenotypic space while maintaining computational and biological plausibility, not a claim about the brain's actual parameterization. We regard this set as a principled starting point rather than a closed inventory: future work may show that some dimensions should be merged, split, or replaced, and future neuroimaging and computational modeling work will be needed to determine whether these functional parameters map onto identifiable cortical hierarchies or emerge from more distributed dynamics.
 
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. We first describe the four levels of the cascade in detail, specifying the functional role of each node, its theoretical grounding in the existing literature, and its connectivity within the hierarchy. We then show how the cascade can accommodate the phenotypic profiles documented by the Big Five, Cybernetic Big Five Theory, Gray's BIS/BAS, Barrett's Constructed Emotion model, the HiTOP dimensional taxonomy, and other frameworks, mapping their constructs onto a shared parameter space. We close by discussing the model's testable predictions, its implications for computational psychiatry and intervention science, and the empirical programme required to test its core claims.

To make the architecture concrete, we accompany the model with an open-source interactive implementation (@fig-app) in which the cascade is rendered as a working, if simplified, generative system: each downstream node computes a precision-weighted combination of its upstream inputs (with precision set to the inverse of the propagated variance), so that adjusting any Ultra-Prior reconfigures the affective states, precision biases, and phenotypic profiles in real time. It is not a substitute for the formal computational models the empirical programme will require, but it serves as a functioning proof-of-concept that the proposed connectivity does generate coherent, recognizable personality profiles from a small set of deep parameters. @fig-architecture summarizes the full static architecture: the four levels of the cascade, the grouping of the six Ultra-Priors into three Imperatives and of the six Precision Biases into three self-models, and the convergence of the cascade onto the Big Five and their Plasticity and Stability meta-traits.



```{r}
#| fig-cap: "Screenshot of the open-source interactive companion application (github.com/RealityBending/DeepSelfModel). Users adjust each Ultra-Prior, represented as a probability distribution whose mean encodes the expectation and whose width encodes the inverse precision, and watch the consequences propagate in real time across the Core Affective States, Precision Biases, and observable phenotypes. The application operationalizes the cascade as precision-weighted message passing and serves as a functioning proof-of-concept and pedagogical resource rather than a formal computational model."
#| message: false
#| warning: false
#| apa-twocolumn: true
#| label: fig-app

knitr::include_graphics("figures/figure1.png")
```



## Ultra-Priors (The Deep Self)

Ultra-Priors constitute the agent's most fundamental and deeply entrenched probabilistic beliefs about its situation. They are called "ultra" to emphasise their position at the apex of the generative hierarchy: above the priors governing individual inferences, above the affective states those inferences generate, and above the moment-to-moment precision allocations that modulate attention and action. They form the computational bedrock of the system, the slow-moving constitutional layer that sets the ceiling and floor on what is achievable at every level below.

In formal active inference terms, Ultra-Priors correspond to the hyperparameters of the generative model: the parameters that govern the parameters governing the agent's predictions. They evolve on slow developmental timescales, are substantially heritable, consistent with the high heritability of broad personality dimensions [@bouchard2003genetic; @vukasovic2015heritability], and are shaped by early attachment experiences, cultural embedding, and cumulative learning history. Their effects are pervasive rather than domain-specific: a shift in any single Ultra-Prior propagates through the entire cascade, reconfiguring affective states, precision biases, and observable phenotypes simultaneously. This pervasive influence is what justifies their hierarchical apex position: they are not one set of parameters among others, but the constitutive conditions under which all other parameters operate.

These priors do not exist in a vacuum; they govern a self-organising system that is formally delimited by a *Markov blanket*. This central concept refers to the statistical boundary that separates an agent's internal states from the external environment: it consists of the sensory states through which external causes impinge on the agent, and the active states through which the agent impinges on the environment. The blanket is not a physical membrane but a formal partition that defines what counts as "self" and "world" for a given system. Individual differences in how agents manage the permeability and coupling of this boundary (i.e., how open or closed they are to environmental influence, how strongly they couple their internal dynamics to those of other agents) are central to the personality differences this framework aims to explain.

Six Ultra-Priors are proposed, organised along three Imperatives. The Epistemic Imperative governs the agent's foundational relationship with uncertainty. The Allostatic Imperative governs its foundational expectations about its own metabolic and efficacy resources. The Teleological Imperative governs its goal-directed orientation: the expected value of outcomes and the temporal depth across which it plans. Together, these three Imperatives cover the full space of what an agent must implicitly "believe" about its world, its body, and its future in order to operate as a self-organising system. Why emphasizing these six in particular? Our motivation is functional: to maintain itself, a complete adaptive agent must arguably implicitly answer the following six questions. About the *world*: Is the environment predictable and is sensory information reliable? About the *body and action*: Do I have sufficient resources and can my actions change outcomes? About *value and time*: Are desirable states attainable and is the future worth investing in? Each question targets a distinct (and potentially orthogonal) source of uncertainty that an agent must resolve to act adaptively, explaining our decision to treat them as separable latent dimensions.


### The Epistemic Imperative

The Epistemic Imperative governs the agent's foundational relationship with uncertainty: its deep beliefs about the opacity of the world and the tractability of its own knowledge-generating processes. It is composed of two orthogonal parameters that dissociate the *dynamics* of uncertainty from its *baseline level*.

*Volatility Expectation* encodes the agent's prior belief about how rapidly the hidden causes of sensory observations change over time (i.e., the expected rate of environmental non-stationarity). This parameter corresponds directly to the ω (omega) hyperparameter of the Hierarchical Gaussian Filter [HGF; @mathys2011filter; @mathys2014uncertainty], a widely validated computational model of learning under uncertainty, whose recoverability from behavioural data provides a natural empirical route to measuring this prior. High ω implies that the agent expects environmental contingencies to fluctuate rapidly, with several cascading consequences: it attenuates confidence in previously learned associations (yielding a higher effective learning rate), keeps prediction error signals in a state of chronic partial unresolvability, and maintains the agent in a posture of readiness for model revision. This profile (chronically elevated learning rate combined with persistent uncertainty about whether the current model is adequate) constitutes the computational substrate of anxiety-related disposition: the world is expected to surprise, and those surprises are expected to reflect genuine structural change rather than incidental noise.

At the neurobiological level, Volatility Expectation is associated with noradrenergic signalling [@payzanlenestour2013neural], consistent with the known role of noradrenaline in adjusting the gain on prediction error signals and promoting environmental scanning under heightened uncertainty. High Volatility Expectation is the primary upstream driver of Epistemic Arousal (the Level 2 affective state detailed below), which in turn mediates its downstream effects on Internalizing psychopathology, the FEAR affective system, and anxious attachment.

*Noise Expectation* encodes the agent's belief about irreducible aleatoric uncertainty: the degree of ambiguity expected to persist *after* the agent has developed the best possible model of its environment. Where Volatility Expectation concerns uncertainty about the *structure* of the world (i.e., epistemic uncertainty that could in principle be resolved by better learning), Noise Expectation concerns uncertainty that is, by the agent's own reckoning, fundamentally irresolvable. This dissociation maps onto Yu and Dayan's [-@yu2005uncertainty] influential distinction between *unexpected uncertainty* (associated with noradrenaline, driving model updating) and *expected uncertainty* (associated with tonic acetylcholine, enabling the agent to tolerate residual ambiguity without triggering full-scale model revision). We rely on this mapping at the computational level of the unexpected/expected uncertainty distinction and treat the neuromodulatory attribution as provisional: the cholinergic account of uncertainty is one influential proposal among several and has been substantially qualified and contested in subsequent work [@hasselmo2011role; @moran2013free], so the acetylcholine link should be read as a candidate neural anchor to be tested rather than an established fact.

A high Noise Expectation functions as a permissive prior: the agent expects some irreducible ambiguity and, having already incorporated it into the generative model, does not interpret residual variance as evidence of catastrophic model failure. Low Noise Expectation produces the opposite configuration: the agent expects its world model to account for nearly all sensory variance, so residual uncertainty reads as a signal demanding correction. When that correction cannot be achieved, the mismatch triggers elevated arousal and aggressive precision reallocations, predisposing the agent toward premature epistemic closure, cognitive inflexibility, and heightened distress in response to ambiguous information. The pairing of low Noise Expectation with high Volatility Expectation is particularly destabilising: the agent both expects its model to be comprehensive and finds it perpetually outdated.

### The Allostatic Imperative

The Allostatic Imperative governs the agent's foundational expectations about its own metabolic and efficacy resources, its "body budget" [@barrett2017tce], and its capacity to act meaningfully upon the world. It dissociates two components that are often conflated in the broader literature: the expectation of *having* resources, and the expectation that those resources *can be used effectively*.

*Energy Expectation* encodes the agent's prior belief about the state of its allostatic reserve, i.e., whether the body budget is expected to operate at a surplus or a deficit. This parameter is grounded in Barrett's [-@barrett2017tce] Constructed Emotion framework, which argues that the brain's primary interoceptive task is to regulate the metabolic economy of the body through predictive allostasis rather than reactive homeostasis: the brain maintains running predictions about the body's energy needs and pre-emptively allocates resources on the basis of those predictions.

The Energy Expectation Ultra-Prior represents the agent's long-run default prediction about this allostatic economy. An agent with high Energy Expectation approaches each moment presuming that metabolic resources are available for expenditure, generating a Vitality State that facilitates active coping, social engagement, and epistemic foraging. An agent with chronically low Energy Expectation presumes an imminent or ongoing deficit, generating a low Vitality State that suppresses action, social coupling, and exploration in favour of conservation. Chronic low Energy Expectation, interacting with the other Ultra-Priors in a manner detailed below, constitutes the computational substrate of depressive states and burnout, not as acute mood disturbances but as stable attractor configurations driven by a fundamental prior expectation of metabolic insufficiency.

*Tractability Expectation* encodes the agent's prior belief that its own actions can reliably reduce prediction error: the sense that the world is amenable to influence. It is most precisely defined as the *expected controllability of state transitions*, a construct that maps directly onto the formalisation of controllability in computational psychiatry. This corresponds to what psychological language variously calls perceived controllability, self-efficacy [@bandura1977selfefficacy], or, in FEP lexicon, the expected precision of proprioceptive signals and the expected sensitivity of environmental outcomes to policy execution [@friston2011action; @adams2013predictions].

This parameter governs not only the pragmatic dimension of policy selection (high Tractability supporting approach behaviour, active coping, and environmental engagement) but also the structural coupling of the agent's Markov blanket to the social environment. Because ineffective actions waste metabolic resources, low Tractability creates dual pressure: it suppresses action (via the Vitality State and Action-Perception Bias) and simultaneously discourages social engagement (via the Differentiation-Dissolution Bias). The interaction of these effects generates the anxious-avoidant structure of attachment insecurity, the Internalizing-Externalizing bifurcation in psychopathology, and the Stability meta-trait in personality. Conversely, Tractability is the primary upstream determinant of secure attachment and existential transcendence, i.e., the capacity to extend one's generative model beyond the lifespan through cultural, biological, or structural legacy.

### The Teleological Imperative

The Teleological Imperative governs the agent's goal-directed orientation: its fundamental expectations about the value of available outcomes and the temporal depth across which it plans. It is composed of two parameters that independently determine the *magnitude* and *temporal scope* of motivational engagement, though the interaction between them is where the most consequential personality configurations emerge.

*Reward Expectation* encodes the agent's baseline sensitivity to goal-attainment signals and the expected value of available outcomes (i.e., the prior probability distribution over preferred states). In the formal active inference framework, this corresponds to the log prior over preferred observations, the **C**-vector in Friston's [-@friston2016active] formulation, which weights the expected free energy of a policy by the degree to which it leads the agent toward intrinsically valued states.

Reward Expectation is not identical to experienced hedonic pleasure, nor is it synonymous with Tractability. An agent can hold a high expectation that actions are effective (high Tractability) while simultaneously expecting available outcomes to be low in value (low Reward Expectation), yielding a configuration of competent apathy: the capacity for action without motivational engagement. Conversely, high Reward Expectation with low Tractability yields frustrated approach drive: the agent is drawn toward valued outcomes it cannot reliably attain, a profile with clear relevance to approach-motivated depression [@trew2011exploring] and the specific suffering of the high-BAS/low-efficacy presentation.

At the neurobiological level, Reward Expectation maps onto mesolimbic dopaminergic circuitry, specifically the tonic dopamine signalling that encodes prior expectations about reward availability [@schultz1997neural]. Within the cascade, high Reward Expectation simultaneously amplifies approach behaviour (via the Action-Perception Bias), promotes exploratory foraging (via the Exploration-Exploitation Bias), and elevates hedonic tone (via the Valence State). This triple action makes it the primary upstream anchor of the Behavioral Approach System (BAS), Sensation Seeking, and the Primal World Belief that the world is *enticing*.

*Horizon Expectation* encodes the agent's prior belief about the temporal depth of its policy space (i.e., how far into the future the generative model actively extends its predictions and plans). In formal active inference tree-search frameworks [@friston2017activeprocess], this corresponds to the parameter *T*, the maximum look-ahead depth of the policy evaluation procedure. It is, in an important sense, the most distinctively existential of the Ultra-Priors: it encodes how the agent implicitly resolves the ultimate prediction error of its own eventual termination. It is important to distinguish Horizon, a parameter of the generative model (how far ahead the agent represents and evaluates outcomes), from temporal discounting as a behavioral phenotype (how steeply the value of a represented future reward is reduced). The two are related but not identical: a steep behavioral discount can arise from a shallow Horizon (distal outcomes are not represented at all) or from a deep Horizon combined with low Tractability or low Reward Expectation (distal outcomes are represented but assigned little controllable value). This non-identity is a measurement complication rather than a detail, because the standard assay, delay discounting, is jointly influenced by probability discounting, reward sensitivity, and impulsivity. Isolating Horizon as a prior over policy depth therefore requires paradigms (e.g., very-long-horizon planning tasks or future-self continuity measures) that separate the depth of forward representation from the valuation applied to it; we treat this as an open operationalization problem rather than a solved one.

The Horizon parameter interacts with Reward Expectation to produce a characteristic two-dimensional motivational space. An agent with high Reward Expectation and low Horizon operates as an active present-hedonic system: highly motivated, attuned to immediate reward, but disengaged from longer-range consequences (the computational signature of impulsivity and sensation seeking). An agent with high Reward Expectation and high Horizon is the ambitious, legacy-oriented profile: motivated by high expected value and capable of deferring gratification across extended temporal windows. An agent with low Reward Expectation and high Horizon represents a stoic, duty-driven configuration: capable of long-range planning but not animated by anticipated pleasure, planning out of structure or obligation rather than desire. Low Reward Expectation combined with low Horizon yields a truncated, disengaged motivational profile (the territory of nihilistic withdrawal). This truncation is not necessarily pathological; in some contexts it is an adaptive response to genuine uncontrollability.

At its extreme low end, a truncated Horizon represents a self-model contracted to the immediate term, either because the future is expected to be too uncertain to be worth modelling (related to high Volatility Expectation) or because the agent has adopted strategic disengagement to avoid the enormous free energy cost of a future it cannot control. When chronic, this configuration corresponds to the nihilistic disengagement observable in existential depression and certain presentations of personality disorder, marking a collapse of both narrative coherence and existential purpose. At its high end, a deep Horizon represents a self-model extended across time through legacy, cultural production, biological reproduction, or ideological commitment, i.e., the phenomenological signature of transcendence: the agent that resolves the prediction error of mortality by embedding its generative model in structures that outlast its physical boundaries. Horizon Expectation is accordingly the primary driver of the Existential Transcendence phenotype and a strong upstream determinant of Conscientiousness through its structuring influence on the Future-Present Bias described below.


## Core Affective States

Core Affective States represent the first level of integration across the Ultra-Prior configuration: the phenomenological signal that the agent's deep computational constitution generates as it engages with the world. Importantly, these states are not reactive outputs of discrete emotional circuits. On the model's account, they are continuously generated predictions: the agent's ongoing forecast of its own affective condition, updated in light of how closely the world conforms to its deep prior expectations. They are, in the language of predictive processing, interoceptive predictions rather than interoceptive readouts.

We describe three affective dimensions that aim to dissociate the phenomenological quality of affective experience more finely than the standard two-dimensional valence-arousal circumplex [@russell1980circumplex], while remaining computationally grounded. The proposal that affective space requires more than two dimensions is not itself new: three- and higher-dimensional extensions of the circumplex have been advanced before, including dominance/potency dimensions, the separation of positive and negative activation in the PANAS-X tradition [@watson1999panasx], and integrative developmental-psychopathology treatments of the circumplex [@posner2005circumplex]. Our contribution is not the move to three dimensions per se but the specific identity and computational grounding of the third axis: the dissociation of Epistemic Arousal (uncertainty-driven, interoceptive prediction-error arousal) from incentive arousal, which is folded into the Valence-Vitality complex rather than treated as a generic activation dimension. The choice of these three dimensions is motivated functionally: each tracks one of the three problems an agent must continuously monitor. The first tracks uncertainty, registering whether the world is currently intelligible, and thus governs the imperative to *learn*. The second tracks controllability and resource sufficiency, registering whether the agent can presently afford to act upon the world, and thus governs the imperative to *act*. The third tracks the agent's trajectory toward valued states across its planning horizon, registering whether the future remains worth investing in, and thus governs the imperative to *persist*. Learning, acting, and persisting are basic functional requirements of a self-organising agent, and the three affective states are conceptualized as a minimal set of interoceptive summaries for regulating these functions.

*Epistemic Arousal* is the interoceptively registered consequence of unresolved, high-precision prediction errors, i.e., the phenomenological experience of world-opacity. Generated downstream of both Volatility Expectation and Noise Expectation, it captures the autonomic nervous system's response to epistemic threat: the heightened physiological preparation that occurs when the environment is generating surprises that the current generative model cannot adequately absorb.

Epistemic Arousal is phenomenologically distinct from reward-anticipatory arousal (BAS-type arousal), i.e., the physiological activation generated by the anticipation of valued outcomes. Where incentive arousal covaries with positive Valence and drives approach behaviour, Epistemic Arousal is generated by the anticipation of prediction error: the sense that the world is behaving in ways the generative model has not anticipated and cannot yet resolve. This distinction is computationally important: high Epistemic Arousal without high Valence corresponds to anxiety; high Valence with moderate Arousal corresponds to excitement. Dissociating these two dimensions from a shared generic "arousal" construct is one of the theoretically significant contributions of this level's architecture, and it generates a specific empirical prediction: measures of interoceptive prediction error sensitivity should load independently of measures of reward anticipation on psychophysiological tasks, even when both produce elevated autonomic arousal.

Chronically elevated Epistemic Arousal forces the agent to retreat to its most reliable internal data stream (i.e., interoceptive signals from the body), thereby driving the Interoception-Exteroception Bias toward the somatic pole and eroding narrative coherence. This cascade predicts the empirically observed association between trait anxiety, interoceptive sensitivity, and narrative identity disruption (see below).

*Vitality State* is the phenomenological correlate of the agent's allostatic reserve: what agents experience as energy, drive, and engagement at the high end, and as fatigue, depletion, and burnout at the low end. Generated downstream of Energy Expectation, Tractability Expectation, and Horizon Expectation, it integrates allostatic, efficacy, and temporal signals into a single scalar representation of the agent's capacity to engage with its environment. High Vitality signals an expected surplus: the agent is well-provisioned, its actions are anticipated to be effective, and its future is sufficiently modellable to warrant investment. Low Vitality reflects the contrary: an expected or actual allostatic deficit that triggers a suite of conservative responses, including reduced action, social withdrawal, and suppressed epistemic foraging.

The Vitality State is the principal mediator between the allostatic Ultra-Priors and the Differentiation-Dissolution Bias described in the next section. High Vitality supports social engagement and structural coupling with others (the Dissolution pole), while low Vitality triggers withdrawal and boundary reinforcement (the Differentiation pole). This mechanism generates a specific prediction about attachment behaviour: allostatic load should predict avoidant attachment strategies independently of epistemic threat, a prediction that existing attachment research has not explicitly tested but that is consistent with the empirical literature on illness, chronic fatigue, and depression-linked social withdrawal.

*Valence State* is the phenomenological correlate of the agent's hedonic tone and anticipatory positive affect. It corresponds to the agent's real-time tracking of its trajectory through the free energy landscape: a system moving toward preferred states (i.e., one for which prediction errors are being progressively resolved) generates positive Valence, while a system moving away from preferred states, or one for which preferred states appear increasingly inaccessible, generates negative Valence. Valence thus encodes not the absolute distance from a preferred state but the direction and rate of change toward or away from it, making it sensitive to momentum and trajectory rather than static position.

Valence receives direct input from Reward Expectation (higher prior sensitivity to reward generates higher baseline hedonic tone) and an inverse modulatory signal from Vitality State (energetic depletion blunts positive affect, even when preferred outcomes remain nominally available). This interaction generates the theoretical possibility of approach-motivated low mood: an agent with high Reward Expectation but low Vitality that remains drawn toward valued outcomes it lacks the metabolic capacity to pursue. This configuration maps closely onto the clinical profile of agitated depression and may help explain the heterogeneity of depressive presentations, in particular why some depressed individuals experience prominent anhedonia (low Reward Expectation driving low baseline Valence) while others present with preserved or even heightened goal-directedness alongside severe functional impairment (high Reward Expectation with depleted Vitality).

## Precision Biases (The Self)
 
The third level of the cascade represents the precision allocation machinery of the active inference agent: the dispositional parameters that determine, moment-to-moment and across situations, how much weight the system places on different information sources, action strategies, and temporal frames. Within the FEP framework, precision weighting is the mechanism by which beliefs are selectively amplified into attention and action. It is not a peripheral process but a core computational operation: the agent that assigns high precision to a signal treats it as reliable evidence; the agent that assigns low precision treats it as noise. A clarification is needed here, because in standard predictive-coding accounts precision is a quantity estimated on-the-fly, not a fixed individual constant. We do not claim otherwise. What we posit as trait-like is not a precision value but a *bias* in the precision-setting policy: a stable disposition in how an individual's precision-estimation process is configured (its baselines, gains, and the priors that constrain it), which yields characteristic precision allocations when averaged across situations. On this reading, a \"Precision Bias\" is a second-order parameter governing situational precision dynamics, and it is itself partly downstream of stable prior beliefs at the Ultra-Prior level rather than an independent primitive. This distinction matters: it makes the precision biases the locus where stable priors and transient context meet, and it predicts that the same individual will show systematic, prior-consistent shifts in precision across situations rather than a context-invariant constant. Accordingly, personality traits are not equated with precision biases as such; rather, they are interpreted as the stable attractor geometries that a particular configuration of Ultra-Priors, affective states, and precision biases jointly carves into the agent's free energy landscape. Precision biases are a principal determinant of the depth and rigidity of those attractors, but it is the geometry of the generative model as a whole, not any single parameter, that observers come to classify as personality.
 
These biases are called "self" biases because they correspond to the three canonical layers of phenomenological self-organisation identified in both cognitive neuroscience and the philosophy of mind, now given explicit computational content by the cascade. The Minimal Self governs the agent's sensory and somatic boundary with the world. The Agentic Self governs its epistemic and volitional engagement with the world. The Narrative Self governs its temporal continuity and autobiographical coherence. Together these three registers span the full architecture of selfhood: how the agent is in the world, who it is as an acting subject, and what it projects itself to be across time.
 
It is worth noting that these three self-registers map preferentially onto the three Imperatives at the top of the hierarchy: the Minimal Self is primarily shaped by the Epistemic Imperative, the Agentic Self by the Allostatic and Teleological Imperatives, and the Narrative Self by the Teleological Imperative. This cross-level structural coherence is not incidental. It reflects the model's underlying claim that the full architecture of the self, from its most primitive sensory boundary to its most elaborated temporal self-projection, can be derived from three fundamental questions every self-organising agent must implicitly answer. Echoing Kant's fundamental triad (*Critique of Pure Reason*), these are: what can I know? what can I control? and what should I seek? Or, in more existentialist terms: how to read the world, how to wield the body, and what to value across time.
 
### The Minimal Self: Interoceptive and Boundary Biases
 
The Minimal Self represents the most fundamental layer of self-organisation: the topological parameters of the Markov blanket that delineates the agent from its environment. It is linked to Metzinger's [-@metzinger2003being] Minimal Phenomenal Self, Damasio's [-@damasio1999feeling] Proto-Self, and the interoceptive inference framework of Seth [-@seth2013interoceptive; -@seth2021being]. Its two biases govern where the agent's primary self-regulatory anchor is located (interoception vs. exteroception) and how permeable its boundary with the world is (differentiation vs. dissolution).
 
The *Interoception-Exteroception Bias* governs the relative weight the self-model places on internal bodily signals versus external sensory structure for the purposes of self-regulation and prediction error resolution. When the body is the primary anchor, driven by chronically elevated Epistemic Arousal, the agent monitors its own somatic state with high precision, amplifying the consequences of physiological disturbances and privileging interoceptive signals in the construction of emotional experience. This configuration corresponds to the Neuroticism phenotype: a stable attractor in which trait anxiety is sustained not by the world's objective unpredictability but by the agent's tendency to use its own aroused somatic state as the primary evidence about the world's safety.
 
High interoceptive bias also suppresses structural coupling with other agents: when the body is the primary regulatory anchor, the agent invests less in establishing synchrony with others or in using environmental structure for prediction. This suppression is the mechanism by which chronic anxiety generates social withdrawal, not through deliberate avoidance but through the implicit reallocation of precision toward the interoceptive channel.
 
At the neurobiological level, interoceptive precision weighting is associated with insular cortex activity, anterior cingulate cortex function, and the high-low vagal tone continuum, consistent with the extensive literature linking these structures to both trait anxiety and interoceptive awareness [@critchley2017interoception].
 
The *Differentiation-Dissolution Bias* governs the structural coupling of the agent's Markov blanket to other agents and to the environment more broadly. The Differentiation pole favours the maintenance of clearly bounded, autonomous self-models; the Dissolution pole favours intense synchrony with other agents and the environment, reducing the information-theoretic boundary between self and other.
 
This bias receives converging inputs from the Vitality State (energetic surplus enables social engagement while deficit forces withdrawal) and from Tractability Expectation (an agent that expects its actions to be effective can afford to couple closely with others; an agent that expects futility will withdraw to preserve internal integrity). The interaction of these two inputs generates the empirically observed anxious-avoidant structure of attachment insecurity: high Epistemic Arousal combined with adequate Tractability produces anxious over-coupling, as the agent seeks synchrony to resolve uncertainty; low Vitality combined with low Tractability produces avoidant withdrawal, as the agent retreats to preserve limited resources.
 
The Differentiation-Dissolution Bias is the primary upstream driver of Extraversion and Agreeableness in the Big Five, of the Externalizing spectrum in HiTOP, and of all three attachment pattern phenotypes. It also determines the expression of Panksepp's PANIC/GRIEF system: separation distress is, on this account, the phenomenological signature of an abrupt, involuntary shift toward the extreme Differentiation pole, resulting in the loss of synchrony with a partner whose Markov blanket had been partially incorporated into the agent's own self-model.
 
### The Agentic Self: Epistemic and Volitional Biases
 
The Agentic Self represents the epistemic and volitional dimension of the self-model: the system that actively controls its own knowledge-gathering and world-changing processes. It corresponds to Metzinger's [-@metzinger2003being] Epistemic Agent Model, the active inference framework for understanding how agents select among exploration and exploitation policies [@friston2015active; @pezzulo2015active], and DeYoung's [-@deyoung2015cybernetic] cybernetic analysis of the Plasticity meta-trait as a system for managing uncertainty.
 
The *Action-Perception Bias* governs the relative weight the agent places on changing the world versus changing its beliefs about the world as the primary mode of prediction error resolution. An action-heavy parameterisation (i.e., high precision on proprioceptive signals and motor commands) generates a system that resolves uncertainty by acting upon the environment: approach drive, assertiveness, and rapid behavioural engagement. A perception-heavy parameterisation generates a system that resolves uncertainty by internal belief updating: reflection, accommodation, and conceptual revision.
 
This bias is shaped by two convergent upstream inputs. Tractability Expectation amplifies action, since an agent that expects its actions to be effective naturally prefers action as a resolution strategy. Reward Expectation amplifies action as well, because high-value outcomes motivate approach. However, the bias stands in a structural trade-off with the Exploration-Exploitation Bias: the same attentional and metabolic resources allocated to active environmental control cannot simultaneously be allocated to exploratory information-gathering. This trade-off generates a specific prediction that is consistent with the empirically observed small negative correlation between Conscientiousness and Openness to Experience: a generative account in which that correlation reflects a precision allocation constraint rather than two independently varying trait dimensions.
 
The *Exploration-Exploitation Bias* governs the relative weight the agent places on epistemic policies, i.e., those that yield high information gain, versus pragmatic policies that exploit known priors to secure preferred outcomes. This bias is most naturally expressed in terms of expected free energy, the quantity active inference uses to score policies, which decomposes into an epistemic (information-gain) term and a pragmatic, extrinsic (preference-satisfaction) term [@friston2015active; @smith2022stepbystep]. In these terms, the Exploration-Exploitation Bias is the agent's characteristic relative weighting of the epistemic versus the extrinsic component when evaluating policies: an exploration-biased agent assigns more weight to expected information gain, an exploitation-biased agent to expected proximity to preferred outcomes. This framing also clarifies the relationship to the Teleological Imperative: Reward Expectation enters principally through the extrinsic term (the prior over preferred observations), Horizon Expectation through the temporal depth over which expected free energy is accumulated, and Noise Expectation through the expected resolvability of the epistemic term. The construct is closely related to curiosity [@kidd2015psychology; @parr2017uncertainty].
 
Importantly, this bias may be more precisely understood as two qualitatively distinct sub-dimensions that share a common upstream driver but diverge in their target domain. *Somatic Exploration* is epistemic foraging directed at the physical Markov blanket, translating into risk-taking, high-intensity sensory experience, and somatic edge-testing. This sub-dimension is the primary driver of Sensation Seeking and shares variance with the action pole of the Action-Perception Bias. Its logic can be understood as a graded programme of injecting prediction errors into the physical system to confirm the existence and resilience of the minimal bodily self. At its mild end, somatic exploration characterizes voluntary perturbations of bodily sensing through exercise, breathwork, or cold exposure. At its extreme, it encompasses visceral threat-seeking such as high-consequence physical risk, where the unambiguous certainty of intense somatic sensation functions to ground and reconfirm the self-model against diffuse epistemic uncertainty. This graded structure also explains why somatic exploration is elevated in individuals with chronically high Epistemic Arousal: when the narrative self is unstable, the body offers the most precision-certain available self-confirmation. *Phenomenological Exploration* is epistemic foraging directed at the conceptual and narrative boundaries of the self-model, translating for instance into appetite for creative experimentation, transgressive art, esoteric philosophy, and at its extreme altered states of consciousness induction (e.g., through psychedelic experiences). This sub-dimension is the primary driver of Openness to Experience, particularly its Intellect and Openness-proper facets.
 
 
Both sub-dimensions are suppressed by Vitality deficit (foraging is metabolically costly and is curtailed under allostatic load), elevated by high Noise Expectation (an agent that can tolerate irreducible ambiguity finds exploration rewarding rather than threatening), and strongly driven by Reward Expectation (reward-relevant information carries both pragmatic and epistemic value). This multi-input structure generates a specific prediction: the correlation between Reward Expectation and Exploration should be moderated by Vitality State, such that reward sensitivity translates into active foraging only when metabolic resources are available.
 
### The Narrative Self: Temporal and Coherence Biases
 
The Narrative Self represents the diachronic dimension of self-organisation: the self that persists across time, integrates experiences into a coherent autobiography, and projects itself into an anticipated future. It corresponds to McAdams' [-@mcadams1993stories; -@mcadams2001psychology] Narrative Identity theory and Metzinger's [-@metzinger2003being] Autobiographical Self-Model, and is sustained by the binding operations of the hippocampal-default mode network system. The Narrative Self is a hierarchically higher-order structure: it requires a functioning, stable synchronic substrate (i.e., a coherent Minimal and Agentic Self) before it can construct and maintain diachronic continuity. This hierarchical dependence generates a specific empirical prediction: disruptions to the Minimal Self, such as those arising from severe interoceptive dysregulation, should impair narrative coherence even when the explicit narrative-processing system is structurally intact.
 
The *Rigidity-Fluidity Bias* governs the weight assigned to autobiographical continuity and the stability of the narrative self-model, i.e., the degree to which the agent treats its past self-model as a high-precision prior on its current and future self. At the Rigidity pole, the narrative self is assigned high precision: past identity configurations carry great weight, the self-model is resistant to revision, and the agent experiences a strong sense of continuous personal identity across time and contexts. This translates dispositionally into conservatism, deliberateness, and, in adaptive forms, the stable goal-directedness that underlies Conscientiousness.
 
At the Fluidity pole, the narrative self is assigned low precision: the self-model updates readily in response to new information, allowing for flexible self-revision but also creating vulnerability to identity fragmentation under conditions of high Epistemic Arousal. This vulnerability is the computational mechanism underlying the positive relationship between trait Openness and susceptibility to psychosis-spectrum experiences [@mason2005short], a relationship that has been empirically documented but not previously explained at the level of generative process.
 
Clinical evidence also suggests a U-shaped relationship between Epistemic Arousal and Rigidity in some individuals, who respond to elevated uncertainty with defensive rigidification rather than increased fluidity. This can be interpreted as a compensatory precision re-allocation in which threat amplifies rather than attenuates narrative prior precision, functioning as a structural defence against fragmentation. This inverted response constitutes a clinically important individual difference: it predicts that some individuals will respond to threat with increased rigidity of self-narrative, manifesting as dogmatism, black-and-white thinking, or identity foreclosure, while others will show the more typical fluidity response. Future empirical work should test whether this difference is itself a stable prior parameter or a situationally induced precision shift.
 
The *Future-Present Bias* governs the temporal discounting of predicted outcomes, specifically the rate at which the precision assigned to a predicted consequence degrades as a function of its temporal distance. A high Future Bias (low discounting) means that the agent weights distal consequences almost as heavily as proximate ones, enabling the deliberate, goal-directed, delayed-gratification behaviour that observers rate as Conscientiousness. A high Present Bias (high discounting) means that the agent's decision-relevant representations are dominated by immediately available evidence, yielding highly reactive, context-sensitive, impulsive behaviour profiles.
 
The Future-Present Bias is constrained from above by Horizon Expectation (policy depth cannot exceed the temporal boundary set by the Horizon Prior) and is shaped by Tractability Expectation (an agent that expects its actions to be ineffective has little incentive to plan far ahead, since long-horizon plans that cannot be executed generate free energy without resolving it). This dual constraint generates a specific and testable prediction: Tractability should moderate the translation of Horizon into Future Bias, such that a deep temporal horizon only produces genuinely Conscientiousness-like behaviour when the agent also expects its actions to be effective. High Horizon combined with low Tractability should instead produce ruminative future-orientation without goal-directed follow-through, a pattern consistent with the anxious perfectionism cluster seen in certain presentations of obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders.
 
## Observable Personality Phenotypes
 
The final level of the cascade represents the "Observables": the terminal, macro-level behavioral and experiential patterns that reliably emerge from the dynamic interactions of the upstream parameters. In the context of our model, personality phenotypes are not discrete entities but the stable, downstream attractor states generated by a specific configuration of Ultra-Priors, Core Affective States, and Precision Biases. These phenotypes correspond to the constructs typically targeted by traditional psychometric instruments, such as self-report questionnaires, clinical interviews, and behavioral assessments. While we acknowledge that some modern psychometric tools attempt to directly capture higher-order latent parameters, and conversely, that some deep computational phenotypes remain notoriously difficult to measure, this level essentially groups the "outcome variables" of the descriptive level at which the majority of historical personality psychology and clinical taxonomy has operated. By situating these familiar trait taxonomies here, at the base of the predictive cascade, we do not invalidate them; rather, we provide them with the mechanistic, generative foundation they have historically lacked. The specific mappings between the generative parameters of the Deep-Self Model and the observable phenotypes of established taxonomies will be detailed next.



```{r}
#| fig-cap: "The Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model. Foundational Ultra-Priors (top), each drawn as a probability distribution whose mean encodes the expectation and whose width encodes the inverse precision, are grouped into the Epistemic, Allostatic, and Teleological imperatives. They propagate downward through the Core Affective States and the Precision Biases (themselves grouped into the Minimal, Agentic, and Narrative self sub-systems, and likewise shown as distributions) to generate observable phenotypes, here the Big Five rendered as a radar profile whose vertices group into the Plasticity and Stability meta-traits (Stability is indexed inversely by Neuroticism). Connections follow a control-systems idiom: each links a specific source to a specific target node and terminates in a signed node, blue with a plus sign for activating (direct) projections and red with a minus sign for inhibiting (inverse) projections, with line width proportional to connection strength. The warped grid behind the phenotype level depicts the free-energy landscape, with one attractor basin under each trait and a deeper central basin, illustrating the dynamical-systems reading in which phenotypes correspond to basins of attraction."
#| message: false
#| warning: false
#| apa-twocolumn: true
#| label: fig-architecture

knitr::include_graphics("figures/figure2.png")
```



# Relationship with Existing Frameworks and Constructs


The preceding four sections described the Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model in its own vocabulary: six Ultra-Priors, three Core Affective States, six Precision Biases, and their relationships. The present section maps the major empirical frameworks in personality psychology, affective neuroscience, and clinical science onto the cascade's parameter space. We propose that each framework captures a bounded subset of the structure the cascade describes, and that the empirical regularities each documents are consistent with, and plausibly generated by, particular cascade configurations. These are correspondences and causal hypotheses rather than formal derivations: we do not show that each construct must follow from the model's premises, but that it can be located within a common parameter space in a way that is theoretically coherent and, in several cases, generates predictions the source framework does not. Where a framework's primary constructs correspond directly to cascade parameters, we treat it as a candidate empirical anchor for those parameters. @tbl-mapping summarizes these correspondences; the sections that follow develop each in turn. We have deliberately kept the treatment of several well-known frameworks brief, both for economy and because exhaustive coverage is not the point: the value of the mapping lies in the specific, testable predictions it yields, not in the number of taxonomies it can accommodate.

```{r}
#| label: tbl-mapping
#| tbl-cap: "Mapping of major existing frameworks onto the levels of the Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model. Entries indicate the primary upstream drivers within each level: (+) denotes a positive correspondence, (-) an inverse relationship, and n/a the absence of a primary correspondence at that level. The table is a compact summary; the directional and interaction structure underlying each row is developed in the sections that follow."
#| apa-twocolumn: true
#| echo: false
#| warning: false
#| message: false

tbl_mapping <- data.frame(
  check.names = FALSE,
  "Framework / Construct" = c(
    "Neuroticism", "Extraversion", "Openness to Experience", "Agreeableness",
    "Conscientiousness", "Plasticity meta-trait", "Stability meta-trait",
    "BIS (Gray)", "BAS (Gray)", "Sensation Seeking", "Internalizing (HiTOP)",
    "Externalizing (HiTOP)", "Thought Disorder (HiTOP)", "Detachment (HiTOP)",
    "Secure attachment", "Anxious-preoccupied attachment",
    "Avoidant-dismissing attachment", "Fearful-avoidant attachment",
    "SEEKING (Panksepp)", "FEAR (Panksepp)", "PANIC/GRIEF (Panksepp)",
    "Safe primal", "Enticing primal", "Alive primal", "Ego dissolution (REBUS)"
  ),
  "Primary Ultra-Priors" = c(
    "Volatility (+), Noise (-)", "Reward (+), Tractability (+)",
    "Noise (+), Reward (+)", "Tractability (+), Energy (+)",
    "Tractability (+), Horizon (+)", "Reward (+)", "Tractability (+), Horizon (+)",
    "Volatility (+), Noise (-)", "Reward (+)", "Reward (+)",
    "Volatility (+), Energy (-), Tractability (-)", "Reward (+), Horizon (-)",
    "Volatility (+), Noise (-)", "Reward (-)", "Tractability (+), Volatility (mod.)",
    "Volatility (+), Tractability (mod.+)", "Energy (-), Tractability (-)",
    "Volatility (+), Tractability (-)", "Reward (+), Energy (+)",
    "Volatility (+), Noise (-)", "n/a", "Tractability (+), Noise (+)",
    "Reward (+)", "n/a", "All (precision relaxed)"
  ),
  "Core Affective States" = c(
    "Epistemic Arousal (+)", "Valence (+), Vitality (+)", "Vitality (+)",
    "Vitality (+)", "Vitality (+)", "Valence (+), Vitality (+)", "Vitality (+)",
    "Epistemic Arousal (+)", "Valence (+)", "Valence (+), Vitality (+)",
    "Arousal (+), Vitality (-)", "Valence (+), Vitality (+)",
    "Epistemic Arousal (+)", "Valence (-)", "Vitality (+)", "Epistemic Arousal (+)",
    "Vitality (-)", "Arousal (+), Vitality (-)", "Valence (+), Vitality (+)",
    "Epistemic Arousal (+)", "Vitality (-)", "n/a", "Valence (+)", "n/a", "All"
  ),
  "Primary Precision Biases" = c(
    "Interoception (+)", "Dissolution (+), Action (+)", "Exploration (+), Rigidity (-)",
    "Dissolution (+)", "Future (+), Rigidity (+), Action (+)",
    "Action (+), Exploration (+)", "Rigidity (+), Future (+), Interoception (-)",
    "Interoception (+), Action (-)", "Action (+), Exploration (+)",
    "Action (+), Somatic Exploration (+)", "Interoception (+)",
    "Action (+), Dissolution (+), Rigidity (-)", "Rigidity (-)",
    "Differentiation (+)", "Dissolution (stable)", "Dissolution (+), Interoception (+)",
    "Differentiation (+)", "Unstable across all", "Exploration (+), Action (+)",
    "Interoception (+), Differentiation (+)", "Differentiation (forced +)",
    "n/a", "n/a", "Dissolution (+)", "All (precision relaxed)"
  )
)

knitr::kable(tbl_mapping, align = "llll")
```


## Trait and Dimensional Taxonomies

### The Big-5

Being some of the most robust and reliably measureable features of human personality, the Big-5 factors are prime observable-level targets for our model. As emphasized above, the cascade does not predict, from first principles, that personality variance must partition into exactly five orthogonal dimensions; this is a genuine limit on its explanatory reach, not a detail. What the mapping offers is an account of the *pattern of covariance* among observable dispositions, with the empirical five-factor structure treated as a tractable dimensionality reduction of the cascade's more continuous output space. Each factor is here interpreted as a stable attractor configuration associated with a coherent upstream parameter combination rather than a single isolated cause. The mappings below are causal hypotheses about each factor's determinants, not derivations of the factors as observed.

*Neuroticism* is associated with high Volatility Expectation combined with low Noise Expectation, propagating into chronic Epistemic Arousal and downstream into the Interoception-Exteroception Bias, with a proposed inverse projection from narrative Rigidity (a coherent autobiographical self-model buffering against the phenotype). The cascade locates the proximate source of trait anxiety not in the affective system per se but in a prior configuration that expects the world to change rapidly and to yield no tolerable residual ambiguity, generating persistent prediction error that cannot be absorbed or resolved. Neuroticism's diverse facet structure, spanning anxiety, depression-proneness, irritability, and self-consciousness, is interpreted as the downstream bifurcation of this Arousal signal: anxiety facets via the Arousal pathway into somatic Interoception; depression-prone facets via Arousal-driven suppression of narrative Rigidity; irritability via the interaction of high Arousal with a retained Action Bias; and self-consciousness via the Interoception pathway's suppression of social Dissolution coupling.

*Extraversion* emerges from the path Reward Expectation and Tractability converging on Valence and Vitality, and downstream into the Dissolution pole of the Differentiation-Dissolution Bias combined with the Action pole of the Action-Perception Bias. The cascade explains Extraversion's trans-domain facet structure (social engagement, positive affect, assertiveness, activity level) as the convergent expression of two distinct computational streams: the social synchrony stream via Dissolution and the approach drive stream via Action Bias. These share common upstream drivers and therefore co-occur reliably without being computationally identical. This generates a testable dissociation: individuals with high Reward Expectation but low Vitality (for instance, under allostatic depletion) should retain elevated Action Bias while Dissolution is suppressed, producing a socially withdrawn but internally motivated profile that standard Extraversion questionnaires would misclassify.

*Openness to Experience* emerges from the path of high Noise Expectation combined with adequate Reward Expectation, feeding into the Phenomenological sub-dimension of the Exploration-Exploitation Bias, together with low Rigidity. High Noise Expectation provides the permissive buffer that makes conceptual exploration non-threatening: an agent that has already incorporated irreducible ambiguity into its generative model can pursue novel information without treating conceptual disruption as evidence of model failure. Low Rigidity provides the complementary parameter: a fluid self-model accommodates challenging new information by updating rather than defending. The cascade predicts that Openness's Intellect and Openness-proper facets [@deyoung2007between] reflect the differential contribution of Phenomenological Exploration, driven by ambiguity tolerance, versus Somatic Exploration, driven by Reward Expectation. To the extent the contested cholinergic account of expected uncertainty holds [@yu2005uncertainty; @hasselmo2011role; @moran2013free], this dissociation is in principle testable through differential prediction by acetylcholinergic versus dopaminergic psychophysiological markers, though the cholinergic mapping is speculative and the prediction does not depend on it being correct in detail. The same dissociation accommodates Zuckerman's [-@zuckerman1979sensation; -@zuckerman1994behavioral] Sensation Seeking, which the cascade locates at the high-Reward-Expectation/Somatic-Exploration pole (physical risk and intense sensory engagement) as distinct from the high-Noise-Expectation/Phenomenological-Exploration pole underlying Openness-Intellect; their surface correlation should accordingly shrink once the shared, Vitality-gated foraging term is controlled [@zuckerman2006biosocial].

*Agreeableness* emerges from the path Tractability and Vitality, converging on the Dissolution pole without the Action Bias amplification that characterizes Extraversion. Agreeableness represents cooperative coupling: sustained investment in social synchrony that does not require high approach drive or pronounced positive affect as its proximate motivation. Because Agreeableness and Extraversion share the Dissolution pathway while diverging on the Action Bias, the cascade predicts a moderate positive genetic correlation between the two factors, consistent with the empirical literature, while also predicting that allostatic depletion should suppress Agreeableness more readily than Extraversion, as Vitality governs Dissolution directly while Extraversion receives additional upstream support through the Reward-Valence pathway that is more metabolically independent. Agreeableness might also be influenced by the Future-Present Bias, representing the computational mechanism of stable prosocial cooperation in iterated interactions, and aligned with the "shadow of the future" concept [@bo2005cooperation]. By grounding Agreeableness in temporal policy extension, the cascade models it not merely as a drive for immediate social synchrony, but as a long-range regulatory strategy for maintaining mutually beneficial alliances.

*Conscientiousness* emerges from the path Tractability combined with deep Horizon Expectation, propagating into Future-Present Bias, narrative Rigidity, and effective policy execution via the Action Bias. Additionally, it is inversly predicted by Epistemic Arousal, as sustained prediction-error overload degrades the system's capacity for goal-directed self-regulation. The cascade predicts that Conscientiousness decomposes into at least two computationally distinct sub-components: an orderliness component (driven by narrative Rigidity, the maintenance of a stable, consistent self-model across time) and an industriousness component (driven by Tractability combined with Future Bias, effective action organized around long-range goals). These sub-components should show dissociable sensitivity to allostatic load: narrative-based orderliness, being a precision weight on autobiographical priors, should be more susceptible to acute pharmacological and situational disruption, while industriousness should be more resistant to acute perturbation and more sensitive to chronic changes in perceived efficacy.

The cascade's derivation of five broad factors does not preclude the possibility of a sixth. The HEXACO model [@ashton2007empirical] identifies *Honesty-Humility* as a dimension capturing individual differences in sincerity, fairness, and resistance to exploiting others for personal gain, which loads negatively on psychopathy-spectrum traits and positively on prosocial restraint. Within the cascade, Honesty-Humility corresponds to a specific configuration of the Differentiation-Dissolution Bias in interaction with Tractability: an agent with high Tractability (confident in its own efficacy) that nonetheless maintains a high Dissolution coupling to others will experience the exploitation of those others as a self-model violation rather than an opportunity, because defection generates prediction errors against the agent's own preferred relational states. In contrast, low Dissolution combined with high Tractability generates the exploitative configuration characteristic of low Honesty-Humility. This mapping predicts that Honesty-Humility should share genetic variance with Agreeableness (both require high Dissolution) while diverging on the Tractability dimension: Agreeableness reflects cooperative coupling under adequate efficacy, while Honesty-Humility specifically reflects the restraint of exploitation capacity. Whether this warrants a sixth independent factor or constitutes a facet configuration of existing cascade parameters is an empirical question that the model leaves open.

### Psychopathology

The Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology [HiTOP; @kotov2017hitop] model constitutes the natural extension of trait-taxonomic science into the clinical range, demonstrating that psychopathological symptoms and maladaptive traits form a coherent dimensional continuum with normal-range personality. Within the cascade, this empirical observation follows directly from the model's architecture: psychopathological spectra are not categorically distinct from personality attractors but represent configurations in the same parameter space that are distinguished by their extreme parameter values, their inaccessibility to experiential revision, or, most importantly, by dysfunctional *interactions* between parameters rather than single-parameter extremity.

The *Internalizing* spectrum corresponds to the cascade configuration anchored by chronically elevated Epistemic Arousal combined with suppressed Vitality State. The sub-spectrum structure maps onto the relative contribution of these two dimensions: fear-based presentations (phobia, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder) reflect primarily elevated Arousal with adequate Vitality, where the system is under epistemic threat but retains metabolic capacity for active coping; distress-based presentations (major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disorder, somatic symptom disorder) reflect the Arousal combined with low Vitality interaction, producing a system simultaneously under epistemic threat and metabolically incapable of sustained response. The cascade predicts that the transition between fear-type and distress-type presentations within the Internalizing spectrum is specifically predicted by Vitality State changes rather than changes in Epistemic Arousal per se, a prediction that maps onto the clinical observation that anxiety and depression share common biological vulnerability while diverging in their allostatic profiles, and that is testable using computational measures that separately index prediction-error sensitivity and allostatic reserve.

The *Externalizing* spectrum corresponds to the cascade configuration of high Reward Expectation and Action-Perception Bias combined with reduced narrative Rigidity and strong Dissolution. This generates an agent that is approach-driven, present-focused, and lacking the self-regulatory narrative scaffolding that ordinarily constrains impulsive policy selection. The cascade predicts that Externalizing presentations are specifically associated with shallow Horizon Expectation combined with high Reward Expectation: the agent is strongly motivated by immediately available rewards but lacks the temporal self-model depth to generate distal consequences as precision-weighted constraints on current behavior. This distinguishes the Externalizing profile computationally from the high-BAS/high-Tractability/deep-Horizon configuration: both involve elevated reward sensitivity, but the former lacks the temporal and narrative architecture that converts approach motivation into deliberate goal pursuit rather than impulsive action.

The *Thought Disorder* spectrum corresponds to the cascade configuration of high Epistemic Arousal combined with low narrative Rigidity. The cascade does not locate the pathogenic mechanism of psychosis-spectrum presentations exclusively in dopaminergic aberrant salience [@kapur2003psychosis], though it is compatible with that account at the implementational level. Rather, the pathogenic process is the interaction between high prediction-error signals and reduced narrative prior precision: the agent accumulates mounting, high-precision prediction errors that it cannot integrate into a stable autobiographical self-model, generating progressive narrative fragmentation. Delusions, on this account, are not random departures from rationality but the agent's best-available narrative explanations for unresolved prediction errors: the generative model's attempt to construct coherence under conditions of extreme Arousal combined with insufficient narrative precision. This account generates a specific and empirically documented prediction: schizotypy (the sub-clinical expression of the Thought Disorder spectrum) should be associated with the combination of trait Openness (low Rigidity) and elevated Epistemic Arousal, consistent with the well-replicated link between Openness, schizotypy, and magical ideation [@mason2005short], and it provides a formal generative explanation for that association that the descriptive literature has not previously provided.

The *Detachment* spectrum (social withdrawal, restricted affect, anhedonia) maps onto a cascade configuration that is computationally distinct from Internalizing despite surface similarities in behavioral output. Where Internalizing involves elevated Arousal driving somatic hyper-vigilance and maintained but anxious social approach, Detachment involves low Reward Expectation combined with the Differentiation pole of the Differentiation-Dissolution Bias: the agent is not threatened by social engagement but simply not drawn toward it. The cascade predicts that the core feature of Detachment, anhedonia, is specifically associated with a low Valence State driven by low Reward Expectation, independent of Arousal State. This prediction provides a computational basis for the empirically observed discriminant validity between anhedonia and anxious distress and has direct pharmacological implications: interventions targeting the dopaminergic Reward pathway should selectively address Detachment-type presentations while having limited effect on purely Internalizing configurations where Reward Expectation is preserved but Arousal is elevated.

The transdiagnostic liability dimension, coined the *p*-factor [@caspi2014pfactor], represents within the cascade a global index of hierarchical dysfunction arising not from extremity on any single parameter but from the compounding interaction of chronically low Tractability and high Volatility Expectation. The constituent ingredients are not themselves novel: existing *p*-factor accounts already emphasize emotion dysregulation (closely related to Volatility in the cascade's terms) and life adversity or uncontrollability (closely related to low Tractability). What the cascade adds is a specific functional form. An agent who simultaneously expects the world to change unpredictably and its own actions to be ineffective faces a qualitatively worse situation than the sum of the two deficits would imply, because each deficit removes a route by which the other could be mitigated: high Volatility is tolerable when actions can be used to test and reduce uncertainty, and low Tractability is tolerable when the environment is stable enough to be learned passively, but their conjunction leaves neither learning nor acting available as a stabilizing strategy. This is the substantive reason for specifying a *multiplicative* rather than additive interaction, and it yields a correspondingly specific prediction: transdiagnostic severity should be predicted by the product of Tractability deficit and Volatility Expectation (estimated via the HGF ω parameter combined with an action-outcome contingency learning task) over and above the additive main effects and over and above any single spectrum measure. The novelty of the prediction lies in this super-additive specification, not in the identity of the two constituents.


Two conditions illustrate well-characterized deviations from the typical cascade architecture. *Autism spectrum conditions*, framed within predictive processing as hyper-precision of low-level sensory priors with reduced contextual modulation [@lawson2014aberrant; @vandecruys2014precise], correspond primarily to very low Noise Expectation: a model that expects to account for nearly all sensory variance, leaving no tolerance for residual ambiguity. This single parameter generates the core triad, sensory hyper-reactivity and intolerance of change (small deviations produce large, unattenuable prediction errors) and social-coupling difficulty (an over-precise model resists the boundary permeability coupling requires, because a partner whose states are unpredictable is a chronic source of high-amplitude error), yielding the prediction that autistic social difficulty should be most pronounced under high relational unpredictability and minimized in structured, predictable environments. *Schizophrenia spectrum conditions* extend the Thought Disorder account to the prodromal-to-acute transition: elevated Epistemic Arousal with low narrative Rigidity generates the schizotypal profile (hypervigilance, ideas of reference, magical ideation), and the shift to acute psychosis depends on Tractability. With adequate Tractability the Action-Perception Bias remains active and unresolved errors are attributed to external agents (positive symptoms); when Tractability collapses under sustained arousal load, the Differentiation and low-Vitality pathways dominate (negative symptoms). The cascade therefore predicts that positive symptoms should precede negative-symptom predominance, mediated by a collapse in perceived efficacy, consistent with the longitudinal phenomenology of schizophrenia [@tandon2009schizophrenia].

## Cybernetic and Motivational Frameworks

### Cybernetic Big Five Theory

DeYoung's Cybernetic Big Five Theory [CB5T; -@deyoung2015cybernetic] is the direct conceptual precursor to the DSPCM, and it is worth making explicit both what the present framework inherits and where it departs. CB5T's central claim, that personality traits are best understood as characteristic parameters of goal-directed, self-regulating cybernetic systems rather than as stable behavioral tendencies, is adopted wholesale. CB5T's reframing of Extraversion as reward-driven approach, Neuroticism as chronic goal-attainment failure, and the Plasticity-Stability meta-trait structure as the fundamental tradeoff between exploration and regulation provides the conceptual vocabulary that the cascade formalizes within active inference.

The DSPCM extends CB5T in three substantive ways. First, it specifies the mathematical form of the control-system computations that CB5T describes verbally, instantiating them as precision-weighted Bayesian belief propagation in a hierarchical generative model. This shift from verbal to formal specification enables the derivation of precise, quantitative predictions rather than directional tendencies: rather than predicting that high-Neuroticism individuals experience more goal-attainment failures, the cascade specifies the computational parameter (Volatility combined with inverse Noise Expectation) whose individual differences predict Neuroticism scores, and specifies the behavioral paradigm (HGF-based learning under volatility manipulation) through which that parameter can be estimated and independently validated.

Second, the DSPCM replaces CB5T's relatively flat trait structure with a genuinely generative hierarchy, in which trait-level parameters are derived from deeper configurations rather than treated as explanatory termini. CB5T identifies Neuroticism with chronic goal-attainment failure but does not specify what computational parameter constitutes that failure or why some individuals are constitutively predisposed to it. The cascade locates the cause in the Volatility-Noise Ultra-Prior configuration, converting Neuroticism from an unexplained disposition into a derivable downstream consequence with specifiable upstream determinants, measurable correlates, and predictable response to intervention.

Third, the introduction of Core Affective States as an intermediate level between Ultra-Priors and Precision Biases provides a principled architecture for the relationship between affect and personality that CB5T acknowledges but does not formally model. In CB5T, affect is treated as the readout of goal-tracking success or failure, but the computational process linking goal-tracking to affective states is left unspecified. The cascade derives affective architecture from the same parameter space as cognitive and motivational architecture, rather than treating them as parallel systems requiring separate description.

The sharpest empirical divergence between CB5T and the DSPCM concerns the role of Tractability. In CB5T, efficacy-related constructs are treated primarily as facets of Conscientiousness. The cascade treats Tractability as an Ultra-Prior that is upstream of multiple distinct trait dimensions simultaneously, generating Conscientiousness (through Future Bias and policy execution), Agreeableness (through Dissolution coupling), and the Stability meta-trait more broadly. This predicts that computational measures of Tractability will show trans-Big-5 predictive validity, accounting for variance in Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, and inverse Neuroticism concurrently, in a way that self-report questionnaire measures of goal-directed regulation cannot, because those questionnaires assess behavioral output rather than the upstream prior that generates it.

### Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory

Gray's Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory [RST; @gray1981critique; @graymcnaughton2000; @corr2008reinforcement] is the most influential neurobiologically grounded motivational account of personality. Within the cascade, Gray's systems are not Ultra-Priors but behavioral signatures of specific upstream configurations: the Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS) corresponds to elevated Epistemic Arousal (driven by high Volatility with low Noise Expectation) propagating into the Interoception Bias and suppressing Action; the Behavioral Approach System (BAS) corresponds to high Reward Expectation amplifying both Action and Exploration; and the Fight-Flight-Freeze System maps onto acute, high-amplitude Epistemic Arousal, differing from BIS in intensity rather than in kind. Read this way, questionnaire-based BIS/BAS scores conflate upstream priors with downstream output, which may contribute to the well-known inconsistencies in the RST literature on these systems and emotional disorder.

The one extension worth developing is the dissociation of BAS from Tractability, which RST does not specify. The cascade predicts an interaction: high Reward Expectation with high Tractability yields the canonical, energetic BAS profile, whereas high Reward Expectation with low Tractability yields approach motivation without effective approach, i.e., the frustrated-approach configuration that @trew2011exploring characterizes as approach-motivated depression. Because standard BAS scales conflate these, the prediction is directly testable: BAS scores and computational Tractability estimates should jointly predict depressive phenomenology, with the BAS × low-Tractability interaction specifically indexing agitated or frustrated-approach presentations rather than anhedonic or anxious subtypes.

### Temperament and Character Inventory

Cloninger's [-@cloninger1987systematic; -@cloninger1993psychobiological] distinction between biologically grounded temperament and higher-order character aligns naturally with the cascade's Ultra-Prior/Precision-Bias split. Its temperament dimensions map onto upstream parameters (Novelty Seeking onto Reward Expectation with Somatic Exploration; Harm Avoidance onto Volatility with low Noise Expectation; Reward Dependence onto socially amplified Dissolution; Persistence onto deep Horizon with Future Bias and Tractability) and its character dimensions onto multi-parameter interactions (Self-Directedness from Tractability, Horizon, and Future Bias; Cooperativeness from Tractability with Dissolution; Self-Transcendence from maximal Dissolution with deep Horizon). One testable prediction follows: because Cooperativeness depends on the Vitality-sensitive Dissolution pathway while Self-Directedness rests on the more metabolically robust Tractability–Future Bias pathway, the two should dissociate under allostatic depletion, with Cooperativeness declining first.


## Affective and Interoceptive Frameworks

### The Theory of Constructed Emotion

Barrett's [-@barrett2017tce; @barrett2016active] Theory of Constructed Emotion proposes that emotional categories are not hardwired circuits triggered by category-specific stimuli but are constructed predictions generated by the brain to explain and regulate bottom-up interoceptive signals in the context of past experience and present situational constraints. The brain does not react to emotions but constructs them, using prior learning to generate the best available explanation of current bodily states and then acting to bring those states into accordance with its predictions. This is a predictive processing account of affect applied at the phenomenological level, and it is in direct conceptual alignment with the DSPCM's treatment of Core Affective States as continuously generated interoceptive predictions rather than reactive outputs of discrete circuits.

The TCE's primary constructs map onto the cascade as follows. Barrett's "body budget" construct, the brain's ongoing allostatic prediction of metabolic needs and resource availability [@barrett2017tce], corresponds directly to the Energy Expectation Ultra-Prior and its downstream Vitality State. The TCE's emphasis on allostatic prediction as the foundational operation of emotional construction is the primary conceptual motivation for locating the Allostatic Imperative at the Ultra-Prior level of the cascade. Barrett's two-dimensional valence-by-arousal affective space corresponds to the Valence State and Epistemic Arousal State, with an important modification described below.

The most substantive departure from the TCE concerns its affective geometry. The TCE inherits Russell's [-@russell1980circumplex] two-dimensional circumplex as its coordinate system, treating arousal as a single dimension spanning low activation to high activation. The cascade replaces this single arousal dimension with two computationally distinct channels: Epistemic Arousal (generated by Volatility combined with inverse Noise Expectation and unresolved prediction error) and incentive arousal (generated by Reward Expectation activating the Valence-Action pathway). These two channels share peripheral output pathways, both can produce elevated heart rate, skin conductance, and cortisol, but they differ in their upstream generators, their phenomenological qualities (anxious uncertainty versus excited anticipation), and their downstream behavioral consequences.

This dissociation carries a strong empirical prediction. If Epistemic Arousal and incentive arousal are genuinely distinct computational channels, they should be doubly dissociable: individuals should experience high Epistemic Arousal without positive Valence (anxious uncertainty without reward anticipation) and high Valence with low Epistemic Arousal (calm reward anticipation in a predictable environment). Multivariate psychophysiological profiles that include measures sensitive to parasympathetic withdrawal (respiratory sinus arrhythmia, high-frequency heart rate variability) versus sympathetic activation (electrodermal activity, low-frequency heart rate variability) should differentiate Epistemic Arousal from incentive arousal in ways that a single arousal dimension cannot, because the two channels have distinct autonomic signatures. This prediction is testable within existing paradigms for inducing threat-based and reward-based arousal independently, and if confirmed, would represent a formal expansion of the TCE's affective geometry grounded in the cascade's computational architecture.

### Primary Emotional Systems

Panksepp's [-@panksepp1998affective; @panksepp2012archaeology] primary emotional systems are, within the cascade, the affective signatures of specific parameter configurations at a phylogenetically ancient level, with individual differences in their chronic activation forming one component of personality variation. In brief: *SEEKING* corresponds to Reward Expectation with the Exploration Bias under adequate Vitality; *FEAR* to acute Epistemic Arousal driving Interoception and Differentiation; *CARE* to the Dissolution pole under adequate Vitality and positive Valence; and *PANIC/GRIEF* to an involuntary contraction toward Differentiation following loss of a coupling bond. Two mappings are worth highlighting because they generate non-obvious predictions. *RAGE* is interpreted not as a threat-detection output but as the affective consequence of a high-efficacy-expecting agent (moderate-to-high Tractability) whose bounded approach policies repeatedly fail to reduce prediction error, distinguishing it from both withdrawal-based depression and diffuse anxiety. And because Vitality multiplicatively gates the Exploration and Dissolution pathways, the cascade predicts that SEEKING and CARE should be suppressed by allostatic depletion faster than by reductions in their respective reward priors, framing parental burnout and compassion fatigue as Vitality failures rather than failures of social motivation.


## Interpersonal and Developmental Systems

### Attachment Theory

Bowlby's [-@bowlby1969attachment] and Ainsworth's [-@ainsworth1978patterns] attachment framework describes how early caregiving experiences are internalized as internal working models: deep prior beliefs about the availability of regulatory partners and the self's capacity to elicit care. Within the cascade, these internal working models correspond to Ultra-Prior calibrations established during developmental sensitive periods, making attachment theory a developmental account of how the foundational parameters are initially set rather than a separate construct to be subsumed.

The four-category model [@bartholomew1991attachment] maps compactly onto two Ultra-Priors, Volatility and Tractability (with Energy modulating avoidance). *Secure* attachment corresponds to adequate-to-high Tractability with moderate Volatility, which lets an efficacious agent invest in coupling without catastrophic risk and so explains the secure-base paradox (bolder exploration supported by trusted return). *Anxious-preoccupied* attachment corresponds to high Volatility with preserved Tractability, yielding relational hypervigilance and intensified but never-settled approach. *Avoidant-dismissing* attachment corresponds to low Energy and low Tractability, yielding a resource-conserving Differentiation strategy and a predicted implicit/explicit dissociation (above-chance implicit social approach alongside explicit preference for distance). The most informative case is *fearful-avoidant* attachment, the conjunction of high Volatility and low Tractability: neither approach nor withdrawal is a stable strategy, making it the attachment analogue of the *p*-factor and predicting the highest transdiagnostic severity of the four patterns, a gradient the cascade reads directly off its architecture.

The developmental framing also yields a prediction about change. Because Ultra-Priors update only under sustained, high-precision counter-evidence, revising an insecure configuration requires the therapeutic relationship to supply consistent evidence of relational reliability (for anxious profiles) or relational efficacy (for avoidant profiles). This predicts that therapeutic consistency and duration should be stronger predictors of long-term attachment change than any single technique [@levy2006change].

### Empathy, Psychopathy, and Narcissism

The interpersonal domain also encompasses a cluster of constructs at the intersection of social motivation, self-model architecture, and the exploitation of others, whose mapping is non-obvious because each requires an interaction of several parameters rather than a single driver. *Empathy* separates into two configurations: affective empathy requires the Dissolution pole (the other's states enter the agent's own interoceptive prediction system, producing felt resonance), whereas cognitive empathy requires a fluid Narrative Self (low Rigidity) plus adequate Exploration (temporary self-model updating to simulate another's perspective without destabilization). The two can dissociate, e.g., high Dissolution with high Rigidity (felt resonance, poor perspective-taking) versus the reverse (accurate modeling without resonance). *Psychopathy* corresponds to high Reward Expectation, high Tractability, and shallow Horizon combined with constitutively low Epistemic Arousal; the low-Arousal component (attenuated Volatility-to-Arousal signaling) is consistent with the documented deficits in fear-potentiated startle and skin-conductance responding in primary psychopathy [@lykken1957study; @hare1991checklist], and low Dissolution accounts for the absence of affective empathy. *Narcissism* shares the high-Tractability/high-Reward components but diverges via high narrative Rigidity (a grandiose, disconfirmation-resistant self-model) and an oscillating Dissolution (recruiting others for validation while being unable to tolerate their independence); the cascade's one specific prediction here is that narcissistic-injury responses should track the interaction of high Rigidity with disconfirmatory events rather than Arousal or Reward independently.

## Existential and Worldview Systems

### Primal World Beliefs

Clifton and colleagues' [-@clifton2019primal] Primal World Beliefs framework identifies fundamental prior assumptions about the nature of reality, notably whether the world is safe, enticing, or alive. Within the cascade these are the most direct candidate operationalization of the Ultra-Prior layer, because they are, by construction, beliefs about the agent's environment and its relationship to it. The three primary dimensions map as follows: the *Safe primal* onto Tractability combined with high Noise Expectation (actions reliably reduce uncertainty and residual ambiguity is tolerable); the *Enticing primal* onto Reward Expectation; and the *Alive primal* onto the Dissolution pole (a responsive environment treated as a co-regulatory partner). This makes the Primals scale a candidate psychometric anchor and yields a validation strategy: Safe scores should track HGF volatility estimates (and ambiguity-tolerance measures), Enticing scores reward prediction-error sensitivity, and Alive scores dyadic synchrony indices. The cascade additionally predicts that the Safe subscale should be factor-analytically decomposable into perceived controllability (Tractability) and ambiguity tolerance (Noise Expectation), a direct test of the Epistemic Imperative's two-component structure.

### Terror Management Theory

Terror Management Theory [TMT; @greenberg1986terror; @greenberg2012terror] holds that mortality awareness generates existential terror managed through cultural worldview defense and self-esteem maintenance. The cascade supplies a candidate computational substrate: for any agent with a non-trivial Horizon Expectation, the prediction of its own dissolution is an unresolvable, high-precision prediction error, so on this account the *intensity* of existential threat scales with temporal self-model depth rather than being purely a cultural contingency. Worldview defense corresponds to extending the Dissolution pole across time (embedding the generative model in cultural structures that outlast the agent's boundaries), and self-esteem maintenance to Tractability combined with Dissolution in culturally valued domains; nihilistic disengagement, by contrast, reflects a truncated Horizon under high Volatility. The cascade extends TMT by predicting that Horizon Expectation moderates the *type* of response: deep-Horizon agents should react to mortality salience with legacy-building (creative production, mentorship, institutional investment), whereas shallow-Horizon agents should react with present-focused worldview rigidification and in-group favoritism, testable using established mortality-salience paradigms [@rosenblatt1989evidence] with Horizon as a measured moderator.

### Psychodynamic and Depth-Psychological Frameworks

The depth-psychological tradition has already found a foothold in active inference. @carhart2010default recast Freudian metapsychology in free-energy terms, mapping the ego onto the precision-optimizing machinery of the default-mode network and repression onto the active suppression of prediction error, and @solms2018consciousness developed an explicitly neuropsychoanalytic account in which subcortical arousal systems set the precision of cortical inference. Within this lineage, several depth-psychological intuitions translate naturally into the cascade. Freud's Eros/Thanatos polarity, for instance, can be read not as competing instincts but as the joint extremes of the Teleological and Allostatic imperatives: an expansive configuration (high Reward Expectation, adequate Vitality, deep Horizon) versus a contractive one (low Reward, depleted Vitality, truncated Horizon). More substantively, the cascade reframes Jung's archetypes without mysticism as phylogenetically conserved, canalized structural priors—the *shared minima* or eigenmodes of the species-typical deep-prior landscape that recur across individuals because they encode ancestral regularities rather than idiosyncratic experience [@mcgovern2025eigenmodes]. What the depth tradition described as the structure of the unconscious, the cascade reframes as the geometry of the deep prior landscape from which conscious affect, motivation, and self-narrative are generated.

# Simulation Proof-of-concept

```{r}
#| fig-cap: "Simulation results for the Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model. Panel A displays the split-diagonal covariance matrix comparing the empirical target structure (top-right, derived from Digman, 1997 and DeYoung et al., 2002) against the simulated cascade output (bottom-left, N = 100,000), yielding an RMSE of 0.043 with matching signs across off-diagonal cells. Panel B shows a sensitivity analysis over varying shared variance among the ultra-priors: the simulated model RMSE (black circles) remains below the randomized-weight null model's 95% CI (grey band) across the precision range. This indicates that the fit does not arise from arbitrary parameterization, but, as discussed in the text, the randomized-weight null is a weak comparison and does not establish that the proposed topology is uniquely able to recover the target."
#| message: false
#| warning: false
#| apa-twocolumn: true
#| label: fig-simulation

knitr::include_graphics("figures/figure3.png")
```

A minimal precondition for the framework is structural consistency: its fixed connectivity must be *capable* of producing the empirical covariance structure it seeks to explain. We tested this, and only this, with a computational simulation ($N = 100,000$; open-source code at *https://github.com/RealityBending/DeepSelfModel*). Each tier computes a precision-weighted combination of upstream inputs. The connection weights were set by hand to reflect the directional and signed effects hypothesized in the preceding sections; crucially, they were *not* fitted, tuned, or otherwise optimized against the empirical target matrix, so the simulation is a test of whether the theoretically specified structure can reproduce the target, not a fit of the model to it. Domain-specific noise bounds absorbed the large portion of trait variance attributable to situational context and item specificity. Because the biological agent calibrates its priors within a single environment, we also introduced shared variance among the Ultra-Priors ($\lambda = .35$) to represent shared developmental ecology (e.g., a hostile environment simultaneously raising Volatility and lowering Energy/Tractability) and genetic pleiotropy.

With these hand-set weights, the simulated correlation matrix reproduced the meta-analytic target [@deyoung2015cybernetic; @digman1997higher] with matching off-diagonal signs and an RMSE of 0.043, accounting for roughly 30% of trait variance from the deep-prior configuration alone. A randomized-weight null model (1000 iterations) produced substantially worse fit (mean RMSE = 0.182), and the theoretical model remained below its 5th-percentile across all tested $\lambda$ values.

We are deliberately cautious about what this demonstrates, because it is less than the numbers might suggest. First, recovering a known 5×5 correlation matrix whose sign pattern is already constrained by the Plasticity-Stability meta-trait structure, using hand-set signed weights, a shared-variance term introduced precisely to capture covariance, and domain-specific noise bounds, is not a stringent test; sign recovery in particular is close to built in once the weights carry the hypothesized signs. Second, and more importantly, the randomized-weight null is a weak comparison: scrambling the weights destroys both the directional topology *and* the signed magnitudes, so it can only show that arbitrary parameters fail, which is unsurprising. It does *not* address the decisive counterfactual, namely whether *alternative* directional topologies, each with weights optimized to the target, could recover the structure equally well. If they can, the empirical fit does not adjudicate between architectures. The simulation should therefore be read narrowly: it establishes that the proposed topology is internally coherent and structurally *capable* of generating a realistic Big-Five covariance matrix, and nothing stronger. Establishing that the topology is *preferred* requires the comparisons this simulation omits, chiefly competing cascade architectures fit under matched flexibility and sensitivity analyses over the connection weights rather than over $\lambda$ alone, together with the out-of-sample predictive tests set out below.


# Empirical Validation

The Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model makes a range of empirical commitments that distinguish it from purely descriptive personality frameworks. This section addresses three aspects of the model's empirical standing: the degree to which existing data already constrain its architecture, the novel predictions it generates that are not derivable from prior frameworks, and the measurement strategy required to test it rigorously. We close with an honest account of the model's current limitations and the empirical program needed to address them.

## Alignment with Existing Evidence

A theoretical framework earns post-hoc credibility not merely by being consistent with known findings but by generating specific, non-obvious predictions that happen to be already confirmed. Several such convergences exist for the cascade.
The most direct available anchor for the Epistemic Imperative comes from computational modeling studies using the Hierarchical Gaussian Filter. The HGF omega parameter, which estimates precisely the Volatility Expectation Ultra-Prior as defined in the cascade, has been found to correlate with trait anxiety and Neuroticism phenotypes across multiple independent samples [@lawson2017adaptive; @powers2017pavlovian]. This is not merely a consistency: it is a cross-method prediction (behavioral task to self-report) that the cascade specifically requires, and its confirmation constitutes partial validation of the Level 1 to Level 2 pathway linking Volatility Expectation to Epistemic Arousal to Neuroticism.

The dissociation between anhedonia and anxious distress, long documented psychometrically and underpinning the structure of the PANAS [@watson1988development], maps directly onto the cascade's separation of Reward Expectation (driving Valence) from Volatility Expectation (driving Epistemic Arousal). The empirical orthogonality of positive and negative affect in factor-analytic studies is precisely what the cascade predicts: these are not opposite poles of a single dimension but outputs of two functionally independent upstream parameters. The cascade goes further than the PANAS model by specifying the computational generators of this dissociation rather than merely observing it.

@makowski2023illusion reported associations between sensitivity to visual illusions (framed as a behavioral measure of prior weighting strength) and personality dimensions, providing a first indication that individual differences in prior precision are detectable through perceptual paradigms and relate meaningfully to trait-level personality structure. The cascade makes a more specific prediction than that study tested: illusion types that tap low-level sensory priors (geometric illusions driven by orientation and contour integration) should correlate with the Noise Expectation parameter (low Noise Expectation generating stronger reliance on prior expectations relative to sensory input), while higher-level ambiguous figure paradigms requiring narrative interpretation should correlate with the Rigidity-Fluidity Bias. Separating these two prediction profiles would constitute a targeted test of the cascade's hierarchical architecture.

The HiTOP *p*-factor loading structure is consistent with the cascade's two-parameter interaction account. The p-factor loads positively on all major psychopathological spectra and is most strongly predicted by the combination of generalized anxiety and mood disorder liability rather than by any single spectrum. This is exactly what the Volatility times low Tractability interaction predicts: both parameters must be simultaneously dysregulated to generate the global cascade failure that produces transdiagnostic severity, while single-parameter extremity generates specific spectrum liability rather than general severity.

Psilocybin-assisted therapy outcomes, as documented in recent clinical trials [@carhartharris2021trial; @davis2021effects], show reductions in rigidity of psychological functioning, increases in psychological flexibility, and sustained changes in worldview-relevant self-report measures. The REBUS model [Relaxed Beliefs Under Psychedelics; @carhart2019rebus] provides the most direct independent line of evidence for the cascade's architectural claim that personality is implemented as a precision-weighted hierarchy of prior beliefs. REBUS proposes that classical serotonergic psychedelics (5-HT2A agonists including psilocybin and LSD) act by relaxing the precision assigned to high-level priors, temporarily flattening the free energy landscape so that bottom-up prediction errors can propagate into levels that are normally too tightly constrained to be revised by experience. In cascade terms, this is a pharmacological perturbation that transiently lowers the precision of Ultra-Prior parameters, and it generates a specific prediction from the model's central metaphor: a simultaneous shallowing of all attractor basins that lets the system traverse configurations otherwise inaccessible. The acute phenomenology of high-dose states fits the same logic. Ego dissolution, the temporary loss of self-other boundaries, narrative continuity, and temporal self-extension, corresponds to the joint relaxation of all Precision Biases toward near-zero: the Interoception-Exteroception Bias loses its asymmetry, the Differentiation-Dissolution Bias shifts toward maximum permeability, narrative Rigidity collapses, and the Future-Present Bias compresses toward the present. This is the computational signature of what contemplative traditions term ego death: not the destruction of the generative model but the temporary suspension of the precision biases that give it its characteristic attractor geometry.

The cascade further predicts that the therapeutic value of these states lies not in the dissolution itself but in the post-acute period. A system whose attractor geometry has been temporarily flattened rebuilds that geometry, once normal neuromodulatory conditions return, around whatever high-precision prediction errors occurred during and immediately after the relaxed-prior window. The relational, environmental, and intentional context of the integration period should therefore be the primary determinant of the direction and magnitude of lasting change, and integration quality should account for therapeutic variance over and above pharmacological dose and acute experience intensity. More specifically, the cascade predicts that durable outcomes should be mediated by pre-to-post changes in Ultra-Prior parameter estimates (Volatility, Tractability, Energy, and Reward Expectation) rather than by changes in cognitive flexibility or symptom dimensions in isolation. This is testable with pre-post computational paradigms, using the HGF omega parameter as a behavioral index of Volatility revision and the Primals scale as a self-report anchor for the remaining dimensions. These predictions are broadly consistent with the emerging clinical literature but have not yet been tested with the computational measures the cascade specifies.


## Novel Predictions

The following predictions share a common logical structure: each requires a specific interaction between two cascade parameters, and each is therefore not derivable from any of the component frameworks reviewed above. A single-parameter one-way prediction (higher X produces more Y) is consistent with both the cascade and with simpler non-computational accounts. The interaction predictions below are not: they require the cascade's specific hierarchical architecture to generate them, and if they fail under well-powered tests with independently measured parameters, the relevant portion of the cascade's architecture is specifically disconfirmed.

The Volatility-Tractability interaction predicts transdiagnostic severity better than either parameter independently. This is testable by combining HGF omega estimation from a volatility learning task with a computational action-outcome contingency task estimating Tractability, then regressing their product onto p-factor scores derived from a broad psychopathological symptom battery. The interaction term should account for transdiagnostic variance over and above the main effects and over and above any single spectrum measure.

The Reward Expectation by Tractability interaction predicts depression subtype. High Reward Expectation combined with low Tractability should specifically produce the agitated, approach-motivated, anhedonia-absent depressive profile [@trew2011exploring], while low Reward Expectation should produce anhedonic depression regardless of Tractability. This is testable in clinical samples using probabilistic reward task parameters combined with action-outcome contingency task parameters as predictors of depression phenotype as assessed by item-level symptom measures rather than total scores.

The Openness-Schizotypy association is mediated by Noise Expectation, not Reward Expectation. Ambiguity tolerance (assayed via signal detection paradigms under irreducible noise, or acetylcholinergic psychophysiological challenge) should mediate the Openness-schizotypy correlation, while reward prediction-error sensitivity (dopaminergic) should not. This dissociates the cascade account from purely dopaminergic aberrant salience accounts of schizotypy [@kapur2003psychosis].

Allostatic depletion shifts the Plasticity-Stability balance toward Stability regardless of baseline Ultra-Prior configuration. Under metabolic constraint, agents should show reduced Exploration Bias and increased Rigidity, producing a phenotypic shift toward the Stability pole even in individuals with high baseline Reward Expectation and low Noise Expectation. This is testable in within-subjects designs using physical fatigue, sleep deprivation, or metabolic depletion protocols with momentary assessment of Plasticity-related behaviors before and after.

Mortality salience effects differ in type as a function of Horizon Expectation. Agents with deep Horizon parameters should respond to mortality reminders with increased legacy-building intentions (creative production, mentorship, institutional investment), while those with shallow Horizon should respond with increased worldview rigidification and in-group favoritism. This is testable using established mortality salience paradigms [@rosenblatt1989evidence] with Horizon Expectation measured as a between-subjects moderator via temporal discounting tasks or future-self continuity measures.

Pre-post psilocybin therapy changes should be detectable in Ultra-Prior behavioral measures, specifically HGF omega and Primals scale scores, and should predict therapeutic outcome independently of changes in symptom severity. Existing clinical trial datasets that administered pre and post behavioral tasks could test this with available data.
Self-Directedness and Cooperativeness dissociate under allostatic depletion (from TCI derivation). Cooperativeness should decline more rapidly than Self-Directedness under acute metabolic constraint, because the Dissolution pathway governing cooperative behavior is more directly sensitive to Vitality State than the Tractability-Future Bias pathway governing self-directed organization.


## Measurement Strategy

The cascade's predictions are only testable if Ultra-Prior parameters can be estimated independently of the phenotypic outcomes they are used to predict. A circular strategy (using self-report personality scales to predict self-report personality scales via latent-variable relabeling) would provide no validation. We therefore map each Ultra-Prior to independent assay methods, organized by the three Imperatives.

The Epistemic Imperative is the most tractable. Volatility Expectation can be estimated from the HGF omega parameter in binary feedback learning tasks under volatility manipulation, a behaviorally grounded, model-based index with good test-retest reliability [@mathys2011filter; @mathys2014uncertainty], with the Intolerance of Uncertainty Scale and the Penn State Worry Questionnaire as psychometric proxies. Noise Expectation requires signal-detection paradigms in which irreducible aleatoric noise is explicitly introduced, so that tolerance for residual unexplained variance can be separated from learning rate; acetylcholinergic challenge protocols (scopolamine or nicotinic modulation) provide a pharmacological anchor consistent with the Yu and Dayan [-@yu2005uncertainty] mapping, and the ambiguity-tolerance facets of Openness provide a self-report proxy.

The Allostatic Imperative is anchored in physiological and behavioral measures of resource and efficacy. Energy Expectation is assayable via allostatic load biomarker composites (cortisol diurnal slope, inflammatory markers, heart rate variability), interoceptive accuracy tasks (heartbeat counting or detection), and subjective energy ratings anchored to metabolic state, with the Chalder Fatigue Scale and related instruments as self-report anchors, though these conflate state and trait components. Tractability Expectation is measurable via action-outcome contingency learning tasks in which the true contingency between responses and outcomes is parametrically varied; generalized self-efficacy scales [@bandura1977selfefficacy; @schwarzer1995generalized] provide validated proxies, though they assess behavioral output rather than the upstream prior directly.

The Teleological Imperative is captured through reward and temporal paradigms. Reward Expectation is assayable via probabilistic reward tasks that estimate reward prediction-error signal magnitude [@frank2004carrot], temporal reward discounting tasks, and effort-based decision-making paradigms, with the BAS scale [@carver1994behavioral] as a self-report proxy, though, as discussed above, it conflates Reward Expectation with Tractability. Horizon Expectation is measurable via temporal discounting paradigms with very long delay intervals (years to decades), future-self continuity scales [@hershfield2011future], and consideration-of-future-consequences measures [@strathman1994consideration].

For all six parameters, the critical validation step is demonstrating that computational task estimates and self-report proxies converge on a common latent variable, and that this latent variable predicts personality phenotypes at a different level of assessment (e.g., informant report or behavioral coding) with incremental validity beyond the self-report proxies alone.

A prior question is whether the six parameters are jointly recoverable at all. Because several Ultra-Priors share downstream consequences, the battery is at risk of collinearity, most acutely for Tractability and Energy Expectation, which both suppress Vitality and promote Dissolution and may be separable only by tasks that orthogonally vary action efficacy and metabolic cost (e.g., effort-discounting paradigms with independent contingency and fatigue manipulations). Parameter-recovery simulations on realistic batteries are therefore a precondition for the validation program. The decisive test is ultimately idiographic: fitting cascade parameters to single-subject behavioral time series and testing whether they predict that individual's trait profile. Such idiographic HGF fitting is feasible but rare, and the nomothetic-to-idiographic transition is the primary methodological challenge for the model's next phase.


# Limitations

The most important limitation is formal. As stated at the outset, the framework is a conceptual-level (Marr computational-level) proposal whose implemented form is a fixed-weight directed path model, not a worked active-inference scheme. We do not specify a joint generative density, perform variational inference, or compute expected free energy, and the correspondences we draw between cascade parameters and existing constructs are theoretically motivated mappings with associated causal hypotheses, not formal derivations. Phrases such as \"the cascade generates X\" should be read in this restricted sense. Consequently, several of the framework's apparent strengths, its breadth of coverage and the tidiness of its mappings, are partly properties of a flexible verbal-plus-linear scheme rather than evidence that the specific architecture is correct. The work of converting the conceptual model into an identifiable generative model, with parameters recoverable from data, remains to be done and is a precondition for most of the stronger claims.

There are also substantive phenomena the model does not currently explain, and we list them rather than fold them into future work. It does not derive the number of personality factors, nor predict why five (or six) emerges; this is left to dimensionality reduction of an unspecified continuous output space. It does not specify the developmental sequencing by which Ultra-Priors are calibrated, only that early experience calibrates them. It is largely silent on sex differences, age trajectories, and assortment, and it offers no account of within-person state dynamics beyond the claim that precision biases modulate them. At the measurement level, several proposed assays conflate state and trait (e.g., fatigue and self-efficacy instruments), and at least two Ultra-Priors (Tractability and Energy) may not be empirically separable with current paradigms. These are boundaries on the model's present explanatory reach, not merely items awaiting data.

The model also describes a top-down cascade for clarity, whereas predictive coding is bidirectional: chronic disruption at lower levels can shift higher-level priors (e.g., severe interoceptive disruption raising Volatility priors without environmental change). The model accommodates this in principle but does not formalize the bidirectional dynamics or the conditions for bottom-up revision of Ultra-Priors. Relatedly, although the Big Five replicates cross-culturally, the model specifies no mechanism for cultural-level variation in prior distributions, so cross-cultural validation of any measurement battery is required.

A further architectural gap concerns sociality. The cascade treats the agent as a solitary generative system that couples with others through the Differentiation-Dissolution Bias, which may underrepresent how constitutively intersubjective human generative models are. Multi-agent active inference frameworks [@friston2024federated; @constant2019regimes] treat social synchrony as a foundational mode in which shared Markov blankets co-construct predictions. A full account of schizoid withdrawal, paranoid ideation, and dominance-submission regulation may require a dedicated social hyperprior (e.g., an Expectation of Synchrony, or a mentalizing prior on whether other agents are represented as minded at all); whether either earns independent Ultra-Prior status, rather than reducing to the Differentiation-Dissolution Bias, is open.

Finally, a framework that can accommodate every major personality taxonomy is at risk of being unfalsifiable, and the breadth on display here is a genuine liability as much as a feature. The protection against vacuity is not the coverage itself but the small set of interaction predictions that the broad mappings are not free to satisfy: the Volatility × Tractability interaction for the *p*-factor, the Reward × low-Tractability interaction for depression subtype, and the Horizon moderation of mortality-salience response type. These are the claims on which the model should be judged. If they fail under well-powered tests with independently measured parameters, the cascade's specific architecture is disconfirmed even if its conceptual framing survives.



# Conclusion

Personality psychology stands at an unusual juncture. Its descriptive achievements are genuine and substantial: the Five-Factor Model, HiTOP, and their extensions provide a reliable, cross-culturally replicable map of human behavioral variation that has accumulated decades of predictive validity across health, relationships, and life outcomes. What has remained elusive is a principled account of why that map has the shape it does: why these particular dimensions co-occur, why normal-range personality and psychopathology inhabit a shared dimensional space, and why traits are simultaneously so heritable and so responsive to transformative experience.
The Deep-Self Predictive Cascade Model proposes that these patterns may be understood as consequences of the computational architecture a self-organizing biological agent must implement to maintain its existence under uncertainty. Under the Free Energy Principle, personality is recast not as a set of properties an individual possesses but as a geometry: the shape of the free energy landscape associated with that agent's deep prior beliefs and precision allocation strategies. Traits are interpreted as attractor basins in this landscape, whose depth is set by precision weighting and whose location reflects the configuration of Ultra-Priors governing the agent's relationship to uncertainty, its own metabolic resources, and its goal-directed future. The cascade from these foundational parameters through Core Affective States and Precision Biases to observable phenotypes is offered not as a relabeling of existing taxonomies but as a candidate generative account: a hypothesis that a single upstream configuration projects onto multiple downstream phenotypes, and that their covariance is a consequence of this shared origin. We have been explicit that this is, at present, a conceptual-level proposal implemented as a path model rather than a worked active-inference scheme; its value rests on the falsifiable predictions it yields, not on the breadth of its mappings.

Several features of the framework merit emphasis as it moves toward empirical test. First, the model's explanatory scope is a strength only insofar as it generates specific, falsifiable predictions that no component framework can independently derive. The interaction predictions identified in the preceding section are the empirical fulcrum on which the cascade's specific architecture stands or falls. If these interactions prove robust under well-powered tests with independently measured parameters, the model's hierarchical structure is supported. If they fail, the failure is informative: it constrains which levels of the hierarchy require revision and in which direction.

Second, the measurement program the cascade requires is demanding but tractable. The Hierarchical Gaussian Filter provides a validated behavioral route to estimating Volatility Expectation, and probabilistic reward tasks provide a corresponding route to Reward Expectation. The remaining Ultra-Priors require more methodological development, but the instruments exist in adjacent literatures and await integration into a coherent battery. The Primals scale, interoceptive accuracy tasks, action-outcome contingency paradigms, and future-self continuity measures together provide a low-burden entry point for a first-generation test of the model's core architecture. Building and validating such a battery, ideally with idiographic computational modeling at the individual level, is the most pressing immediate priority for the empirical program.

Third, the framework has implications that extend beyond explanatory integration. If personality configurations are attractor basins maintained by precision-weighted priors, then the conditions for their change are specifiable: sustained, high-precision counter-evidence delivered in a context that amplifies prediction error at the relevant hierarchical level. This computational account of therapeutic change is consistent with the emerging evidence on psilocybin-assisted therapy, the developmental logic of attachment-based interventions, and the longitudinal dynamics of personality change in response to major life transitions. Specifying the conditions for Ultra-Prior revision in this way transforms intervention science from an empirical art of finding what works into a principled engineering problem: identifying which parameters need revision, which methods generate sufficient precision-weighted counter-evidence to revise them, and which contextual scaffolding determines whether post-revision updating produces lasting change or reversion to the prior attractor.

While the present paper has laid a primarily theoretical foundation, our proof-of-concept simulation shows that the cascade's topology is capable of generating an empirically consistent covariance structure, though, as noted, it does not establish that this topology is uniquely required. The next computational and empirical steps must build on this: transitioning from static structural recovery to dynamic, idiographic modeling at the single-subject level, comparing the proposed architecture against alternative topologies under matched flexibility, developing and validating the behavioral measurement battery, and running the targeted interaction tests that would confirm or disconfirm the model's specific architectural claims. What the present paper aims to establish is more modest than a finished theory: a common vocabulary in which the constructs of trait psychology, affective neuroscience, computational psychiatry, and intervention science can be expressed, compared, and made the subject of a shared empirical program.




# References

::: {#refs}
:::

